__label__political Twas a bright Christmas morning in "Ole Kentuck"; Aunt Sallie was busy disrobing a duck- A featherless turkey close by her side lay, Prepared for the dinner that bright Christmas day. 'Twas a family reunion, and Uncle Joe Moore And his good wife Aunt Sallie, both ten and threescore, Had gathered around them their "girls" and their "boys," With these "children's" children - the grandparents' joys. The "girls" (all past thirty) were helping to make The "sweet tater puddin's," the pies, and the cake; The "boys" and the grand-boys the fires were making, The oldest granddaughter the biscuits was baking, The little grandchildren a dozen or more Were tumbling about just outside of the door; While Uncle Joe Moore, the venerable sire, Sat smoking his pipe with his back to the fire. When the clock tolled the midday the feast was complete, And after each member had taken his seat, The venerable sire rose up from his chair, And with uplifted arms he offered this prayer: "We thank Thee, our Father in heaven," he said, "For the abundance of good things before us now spread; We thank Thee, dear Lord, that I and my wife Have been spared by thy goodness to reach an old life; We thank Thee, of all things, the sweetest and best, For our dear children's presence from North, South and West. Continue Thy blessings, Thy goodness, Thy love, And prepare us to meet Thee in heaven above." The grace being over the feast was begun. The duck and the turkey were carved one by one; The big chicken pot-pie received the same fate, And a generous helping was piled on each plate. After the meats came the puddings and pies; Then how the grandchildren all opened their eyes When one of their uncles from far Illinois Brought out from the closet a basket of toys. As dinner was over, the venerable sire Rose up from his seat and stood by the fire, Where he called to his side each lamb of his fold, And blessed and caressed them like Jacob of old. "What changes we've seen, Sal," remarked Uncle Joe, "These years we've been married, some forty or so. Now let me see, forty? Yes, forty-one years Today, since we met at Uncle Bill Steer's. I remember, ole 'oman, you looked mighty gran', And I was then, children, er good-lookin' man. I walked with your mother from Clayton that night, And 'fore we got home, why I got in a fight. Tom Scott, a 'patroller,' insulted your mother, So I knocked him down, and Ed, his big brother. I then asked your mother if she'd be my wife. Her answer was: 'Yes, Joe, since you risked your life For me up the road, and licked old Tom Scott, Yes, I'll be your wife; why, Joseph, why not?' But the next day, my children, my master sold me To an ole Nigger trader' from East Tennessee, Where I worked on a farm without seeing your mother For eighty long days, till me and another. Plantation hand run away and met with good luck, For we soon found ourselves on the soil of Kentuck. 'Fore my ole master knowed I run erway We two was married that same Christmas day. We was married at Scottsville by ole Peter Brown, Who was a white minister that lived in the town, And would marry us slave folks no matter or not If our masters was willing, if we only had got A couple of chickens or a barrel of corn. The very next Christmas our Lucy was born, And the next of the past that I now can remember Is when we moved here the following September. Then came the war, Sal, and ole marster died, While Missus and you, Sal, stood by his side. Then I left you and children, and went out to fight For the Union and Freedom one warm summer's night. Then good Abr'am Lincoln, he sot us all free, And we had in the county a big jubilee. Then you boys and you girls all worked hand to hand To buy me and your mother this house and this land. Then some of you married, and some went out West, While me and your mother, along with the rest, Stayed on the old homestead and worked night and day, A farming and trucking, and made the work pay. We are glad for to meet you all back here once more, And see your dear babies together, before  Sat smoking his pipe with his back to the fire. Me and your mother (we are both old and gray) Receive old Death's summons to call us away. God bless you, my children, through life, is my prayer," And the venerable sire sat down in his chair. The rest of the evening was passed in a measure Receiving old friends or by chatting in pleasure Till long after midnight, with hearts light and gay. 'Twas a happy reunion that bright Christmas day.
__label__political Who casts a slur on Negro worth, a stain on Negro fame? Who dreads to own his Negro blood, or hear his Negro name? Who scorns the warmth of Negro hearts [illegible] the clasp of Negro hands? If he but shows his traitor's face, we [illegible] him where he stands.  The Negro's blood! Its crimson tide has watered hill and plain Wherever there were wrongs to crush, or freemen's rights to gain. No dastard thought, no cowardly fear his had it tamely by When there were noble deeds to do [illegible] to die.   The Negro's heart! The Negro's heart! God keeping pure and free The fullness of its kindly thought its wealth of honest glee; Its generous strength; its ardent faith; its uncomplaining trust; Though every worshipped idol break and crumble into dust.  The Negro's hands! Ah, lift them up. made strong by honest toil. The champion of the Civil War and of the Cuban soil: Their battle swords they flash aloft, though death in front they see ; The Negro's hands did valiant deeds tot brave Cuba free.  They bore the old flag bravely, and were there at Lincoln's call. They stood beside the foremost rank, with the bravest of them all. And when before the enemy's guns they held the Gray at bay — O never could the Afric heart beat prouder than that day.  So if some proud Caucasian cavils at the darkness of your race, Or speaks in scorn of Africa before her children's face, Then lay aside the flag of truce, and denounce him where he stands  For Negro's worth and Negro's fame were won by Negro's hands.   Published in Colored American Magazine, December 1900
__label__political O, country, 'tis of thee, Land of the Lynching Bee,    Of thee I sing. How long will this base wrong Pollute thy freedom's song? Perpetrated by a throng    Of heartless fiends. My native country, thee, How I long to be free!    Thy name to love. I long to se ethe time When this most heinous crime Will be changed to deeds divine,    Like those above. Let wailings swell the breeze, And ring from all the trees:    "God's will be done." Let mortal souls awake-- Let all that breathe partake-- This spell of crimes to break,    Ere the nation's gone. O gracious God, to thee, In thine all-wise mercy,    We now appeal! May this land soon be brought Out of this doome it's wrought; For long, in vain, we've sought    Freedom to feel. 
__label__political When with itself the soul communion holds ,    And speaks none other than itself and God ;    When in the silence it doth grope and plod— Its way thick dark till God his thoughts unfolds ; When like unto himself the Maker molds    Us more and more , and all the selfish clod    Of sin recedes to ways now long since trod— Then, when the better -self the whole enfolds , How sweet the distant pealing of the bells ,    Far -sounding , whose low echo sways the soul       And calls to meditation and to prayer! Soft, sweet the melody that from those cells    Goes forth to soothe the heart and onward roll       To die upon the bosom of the air.
__label__political I dreamed a dream, and, in my dream, I heard One wail at midnight by a convent's walls. And, as he wailed, he clutched the stars, and shook The pillars of the firmament of God, And rolled the thunders of Olympus down On men; and they besought their holy ones To plead with him ---lest he might spoil the world.     His face was bronze; his limbs were bronze but steel; His mane was blacker than the Steeds of Night. And his great eyes flashed warnings from beneath A citadel where daring thoughts abode. A comely youth---why needed he to weep?       Alas! upon his brow he wore the brand Of degradation, and upon his neck A circlet galling as a crime!--And from The cursed thing a chain of hate e'er bound Him where he stood. His hands were manacled; His limbs wore thongs that cut the flesh agape, Until, for the pure pain, he writhed and wept,--- As weeps a conquered god-the prisoner of Despair! He flung himself upon his knees, and burst into a prayer:        "O God, and hast Thou made me for these miseries? I feel Myself a man ---I have the spirit and The hopes of one. O, why, then, must I strive And fail?---No lake is clearer than my soul; No ship is prouder; none more tempest tost. 'Tis true my brow is dark; but, in the night, My spirit walks the stars, and lightly spurns. Its kinship to this world!---Lord, I have tried; The burden of the failure rests with thee." So fell he tranced.        But, on the plain there rose A phantom of the silent sphinx---the grim, Spell-casting thought of some deep master dead. And lo! beside its ancient, crumbling base, Napoleon, fresh from mighty deeds of war, Halted his band, and spoke in tones of awe.— All this I saw, and dreamed that yet---aye, yet!— The race might rise that built the awful thing That holds its secret still in Egypt's sands.
__label__political Hollerdays hab come once mo ' Hyar it am Thanksgivin '! Ole man gittin' stiff an ' so'e Hahdly make a livin'. But. sah, when Thanksgivin ' come . Honey, I ain't nevah glum; 'Ca'se ma dinnah'll sho ' be some Bress de good Thanksgivin '!  Bes'es ' white folks in dis town Sent a turkey to me  'N evathing to go aroun ' - Dat's de way de do me. Lucy Ann's a-comin ' down Fuh to bake it nice and brown ; Den we'll 'vite de preachah 'roun ' --- No time to be gloomy!  Lucy Ann's my dorter, chile , Wo'kin ' fuh de white folks Up de road about amile .- One o' dese hyar light folks . Roun' 'hyar she's de cullud belle , Preachah's sot to huh aspell , But when Lucy marries — well , Dey mus ' be de right folks!  Lucy's mammy's dead an ' gone Sence she was a baby : Tuk mah chile an' trabbled on -- Raised huh lak a lady ! She ken ciphah , wash an ' cook . An' she reads me f'om de Book Dat lights up de pati I's took To'rds de lan' dat's shady .  But, sah, come aroun ' tonight , Ef you wouldn't mine it; Take de road dah to de right. Easy 'nough to fine it: Come an' tas'e dat dinnah, sah, 'N' meet the preachah `n` Lucy : fuh , Ef he wants a 'ceipt fuh huh, You'll be dar to sign it.
__label__political One day when me 'n' Dunbar wuz a-hocin' in de co'n , Bofe uv us tried an'  anxious foh to heah de dinnah -ho'n.— Him in his fiel', an' me in mine , a-wo'kin ' on togeddah , A-sweatin ' lak de mischief in de hottes ' kine o' weddah, A debblish notion tuck me 't Paul wuz gittin' on too fast'; But, thainks I : "Wait untwel he git 'mongst all dem weeds an' grass. 'N' I'll make him nely kill his se'f, an ' den come out de las'."  Tuck off ma coat, rolled up ma slebes , spit on ma han's an ' say : “Ef God'll he'p me—'n' not he'p him—I beats ma man today !” S'I: "Paul , come on , le's have a race !--I see you achin ' foh it "- S'e: " All right. Jeems , ma son ; strack out — I sho ' admire yo' spurrit." S'I : " Son er father . I'm yo ' match —jes ' ketch me, ef you ken !" S'e : "You'd gib up now, ef you'd take advice fom yo ' bes ' fr'en"- An ' den de way dem two hoes flew wuz scandl'us —gen-Tmen!  De sun shone on us br'ilin ' hot ; but , now an ' den de breeze Blowed fresh , f'om 'cross de maddah lot, de fragrance ob de trees In de ole orchard , jes' beyon '. De birds sung clear an ' sweet ; De tree toad wuz a-callin ' out his 'pinion ob de heat ; De fahm -house looked invitin', an ', erbout a mile away, De town gleamed white -across de road , de falmers made dey hay :–-- But me 'n ' Paul was hustlin ' : 'ca'se dat wuz ouh "busy day. "  By'm -by, I got so tired dat I thought ma soul I'd die An' all de time a-watchin ' Paul, out one side ob ma eye .-- I walks up to de fence, an, le'nt upon ma hoe a spell, An' say : "Paul, how you mekin ' out?" S'e: "Putty middlin' well ." "Dat so ?" sez I, you lookin ' weak!" Se: he " Am dat a fack?- Who wuz it lef' his hocin ' fuss? You bettah go on back ,- An' go to wo'k, 'r I'll be so fur dat you cain't fine ma track!"  'N' back I went, an ' slashed about, an' to'e up mo ' good co'n An' missed mo' weeds den airy othah mo'tal evah bo'n . An' all de time a-thinkin ' thoughts , untwel I come to see Dat, dat ah' kine o' foolishness wa'n't he'pin ' him ner me. S'I: "Hole on, Paul, le's stop awhile, an ' talk an' git ouh breff— 'Ca'se bofe uv us has got to hoe his own patch foh his se'f." Sez he : "Dat's right ; hey ain't no use to wo'k ouhse'fs to deff."
__label__political At a little country meeting in a log house near the road,    The saints had duly gathered "fur de worshup ub de Lord;" When "Bru Levi send de pulpit" cleared his throat, and then began    "De spoundin' ub de scripshur, fur to cheer de spet'ual man. I was a teacher in the county and was in duty bound    In attendance on the services, to help the brethren 'long; Brother Levi was the pastor, and dispensed the gospel here    As he misunderstood it at twenty-five a year. The day was warm and sultry, sleep was getting in my eyes,    When this most unique sermon filled me with intense surprise; "My belubbed congregashun, I bin preachin' 'bout de possle,    An' tock my tex' whar Paul poked his 'pistle at de Romans." "But to-day I gwine to tell you 'bout de chillua ub de Lord,    When dey crossed de ragin' waters at de spokin ub de word. I kno' ya'll lung bin wondrin' how de chillun crossed de sea,    But tiz jes ez plan ez kin be, to er' spienced man like me." "You see twus in de winter an' de water all wuz frez,    By de win de Marster sen dem 'strong nuf to raz de dead; Now ya'll see de thing wuz simple, an' likewise very nic',    Fur all de chillun had to do, wuz to skeet across on ice." "But when ole Farro kum long wid dem hebby chayut wheels,    De ice jes gin away an' ole Farro had to frez." This was hard on my intelligence as the teaching of the school,    So I had to rise and say a word, although against the rule. "Beg pardon, brother pastor, but geographies you know    Say this land is in the tropics where can be no ice or snow. "I thanks you dough I does not like no sturbmence on dis topic,    But in dem days 'twont no gogerfies, so cours dar wont no tropics.” Of course I was dumbfounded, the brethren said “amen,”    An thus he then concluded ere I could speak again, When you gwine to cross de water you better take advice,    An' 'cep'n de Lord am wid you, don't skeet across on ice.”
__label__political Dar's mighty things agwine on,    Sense de days when I wuz young; An' folks don' do ez dey did once,    Sense dese new times is kum; Dey gals dey dresses pow'ful fin',    An all am fur a show; But enny how dis nigger    Am a-stickin' to de hoe. Larnin is a blessed thing,    An' good cloze mighty fin', But I likes to see de cullud gal    What knows jes how to ine, Gimme de gal to wash an' scrub,    An' keep things white an' clean, An' kin den go in de kitchin,    An' cook de ham an' greens. I ain't got no edekashun,    But dis I know am true, Dat raisin' gals too good to wuck,    Ain't never gwine to do; De boys dat look good nuf to eat,    But too good to saw de logs, Am karrin us ez fas' ez smoke    To lan us at de dogs. I spoze dat I'm ole fashun,    But God made man to plow, An git his libbin by de sweat    Dat trickles down his brow; While larnin an' all dem things    Am mighty good for sho', De bes way we kin make our pints,    Is---stickin' to de hoe.
__label__political This rose of the garden is given to me, And to double its value 'twas given by thee; And its beautiful tints to my eyesight is borne, Like a kiss of a fairy, or blush of the morn. How sweet the aroma that is wafted to me, Let the scent of the breeze of the isles of the sea; And it tells of the care of that Father above, Who sends us the flowers to tell of his love. But too soon must this sweet-scented flower decay, Its bright leaves must wither, its scent die away, But its memory lingers and the joys that it bore, Will remain with me fondly, when the flower's no more. Fond hopes too may perish, their leaves fade and die, And great expectations all withered may lie; But He who has loved us and given his Son, Sets a sweet bow of promise and bids us hope on. May our friendship ne'er perish, its strength ne'er decay, But may it grow stronger and stronger each day; And may the All Father his love o'er us bend, Till life's journey's completed, and heaven the end.
__label__political I can not see why trials come,    And sorrows follow thick and fast; I can not fathom His designs,    Nor why my pleasures can not last, Nor why my hopes so soon are dust,       But, I can trust. When darkest clouds my sky o'er hang,    And sadness seems to fill the land, I calmly trust His promise sweet,    And cling to his ne'er failing hand, And, in life's darkest hour, I'll just       Look up and trust. I know my life with Him is safe,    And all things still must work for good To those who love and serve our God,    And lean on Him as children should, Though hopes decay and turn to dust,       I still will trust.
__label__political A little urchin, ragged, black, an old cigar "stump" found, And visions of a jolly smoke began to hover 'round, When finding that he had no match, a big store he espied, And straightway for it made a bolt, to have his wants supplied.  "We have none here to give away; and even if we do, We have no match," the owner said, "for such a thing as you." Down in the ragged pantaloons the little black hand went, And forth it came, now grasping tight a big, old-fashioned cent.  "Gib me a box!" the urchin said,---his bosom swelled with joy, And calmly lighted his "cigar," a radiant, happy boy; Then handing back the box, he said, while his face with pride did shine, "Nex' time a genl'mun wants a match, jes' gib him one ub mine."
__label__political Seems lak folks is mighty curus     In de way dey t'inks an' ac's.   Dey jes' spen's dey days a-mixin'     Up de t'ings in almanacs.   Now, I min' my nex' do' neighbour,--     He's a mighty likely man,   But he nevah t'inks o' nuffin     'Ceptin' jes' to plot an' plan.    All de wintah he was plannin'     How he 'd gethah sassafras   Jes' ez soon ez evah Springtime     Put some greenness in de grass.   An' he 'lowed a little soonah     He could stan' a coolah breeze   So 's to mek a little money     F'om de sugah-watah trees.    In de summah, he 'd be waihin'     Out de linin' of his soul,   Try 'n' ca'ci'late an' fashion     How he 'd git his wintah coal;   An' I b'lieve he got his jedgement     Jes' so tuckahed out an' thinned   Dat he t'ought a robin's whistle     Was de whistle of de wind.    Why won't folks gin up dey plannin',     An' jes' be content to know   Dat dey 's gittin' all dat's fu' dem     In de days dat come an' go?   Why won't folks quit movin' forrard?     Ain't hit bettah jes' to stan'   An' be satisfied wid livin'    In de season dat 's at han'?    Hit 's enough fu' me to listen     W'en de birds is singin' 'roun',   'Dout a-guessin' whut 'll happen     W'en de snow is on de groun'.   In de Springtime an' de summah,     I lays sorrer on de she'f;   An' I knows ol' Mistah Wintah     Gwine to hustle fu' hisse'f.    We been put hyeah fu' a pu'pose,     But de questun dat has riz   An' made lots o' people diffah     Is jes' whut dat pu'pose is.   Now, accordin' to my reas'nin',     Hyeah's de p'int whaih I 's arriv,   Sence de Lawd put life into us,     We was put hyeah fu' to live!
__label__political Summah 's nice, wif sun a-shinin',     Spring is good wif greens and grass,   An' dey 's some t'ings nice 'bout wintah,     Dough hit brings de freezin' blas;   But de time dat is de fines',     Whethah fiel's is green er brown,   Is w'en de rain 's a-po'in'     An' dey 's time to tinker 'roun.    Den you men's de mule's ol' ha'ness,     An' you men's de broken chair.   Hummin' all de time you 's wo'kin'     Some ol' common kind o' air.   Evah now an' then you looks out,     Tryin' mighty ha'd to frown,   But you cain't, you 's glad hit 's rainin',     An' dey 's time to tinker 'roun'.    Oh, you 'ten's lak you so anxious     Evah time it so't o' stops.   W'en hit goes on, den you reckon     Dat de wet 'll he'p de crops.   But hit ain't de crops you 's aftah;     You knows w'en de rain comes down   Dat's hit's too wet out fu' wo'kin',     An' dey 's time to tinker roun'.    Oh, dey 's fun inside de co'n-crib.     An' dey 's laffin' at de ba'n;   An' dey 's allus some one jokin',     Er some one to tell a ya'n.   Dah 's a quiet in yo' cabin,     Only fu' de rain's sof soun';   So you 's mighty blessed happy     W'en dey 's time to tinker 'roun'!
__label__political MINE is the humble duty and endeavor to relate A point of information that the hist'rics don't narrate. Of our country's cause and conflicts, and the progress she has made They tell us, but are silent on the part the Negro played.  We weren't at the discovery of this delightful land, But throughout its development is seen our humble hand . We felled the forests hewed the way for emigration's tide; We reaped the grain and hoed the fields of cane and cotton wide.  We led the first resistance against the despot's sway, When from our land he sought to take her liberties away. We fought throughout the conflict with unselfish resolution, And, vict'ry won, our suffrage helped to frame the Constitution.  'Twas not our fault our valor and devotion were forgotten; 'Twas not our choice that we were made the victims of King Cotton; Unwillingly we were the cause, unfortunate, that rent The Union we would willingly have suffered to cement.  Though our consent was not required, yet do we claim the merit Of multiplying hoards of wealth for others to inherit. Were half the country's lands and goods converted into gold, 'Twould not exceed the revenue for which our labor sold.  Our constant care and faithfulness were levied to provide Comfort and case for those by whom our freedom was denied. We tended them in infancy, in sickness and in age, No want of theirs, nor whim, that failed our service to engage.  And when dread palpitation shook the nation's troubled heart, 'Twas our peculiar destiny to play a triple part. While thousands fought their chains to break, some wrought to weld them faster; Others remained the home on guard to aid and succor master.  With internecine clouds o'erblown, and peace again returned,--- And amity and happiness with our assistance carned, Our service and our sacrifice we've failed not to devote, Our country's cause to honor and her glory to promote.  Then wherefore do our virtues all escape the public eye? Wherefore our imperfections do they seek to magnify? How can our land, our native land, her treachery excuse? The merit of our loyalty, how long will she refuse?  Of all the blood her freedom cost the Negro shed the first; Of all whom freedom ought to bless the Negro fares the worst. She never can repair the loss of what she took away; The debt of gratitude she owes she never can repay.  The hist'ries we peruse in vain in quest of what I've stated, Yet justice will admit my claim is not exaggerated. In peace, in war, in church and state, in letters and in art,--- In every worthy work and way the Negro plays his part.
__label__political It was a twentieth century eden, mine ; A modern Adam, I; and for my Eve , God gave a winsome woman with senses fine Who deemed the cloth -of-life of golden weave. 'Mid trees whereon hung riches, pleasur, glory, Again thro ' eden's garden went we twain, Care -free and gay as when in ancient story The first fair Eve with Adam led the train Of all the living down the vernal vales, And threaded sun-flecked shadowed paths of paradise; Or rested at the noon in those sweet - scented bowers In trustful love, while drinking from each other's eyes Mutual content and joy and happiness for hours . The feast with plenty flower -crowned,    Sweet music's most enchanting strain, Dance with her deft and measured round ,       And lays          Of poet-praise Were ours: and counted not as vain .    Ah, eden days indeed ! days of delight    That melted into golden mist at night ! We drank from selfish satisfaction's cup,          Content , and toyed With life's ideals . Drank the dregs (ah, sorry sup!)          O fsin and cloyed. Riches, success, soft ease , and luxury Were our cup-bearers round our bounteous board , Disguised devil -gods, who from the tree Of life made their wit-stealing wine and poured For us a heaven-forbidden draught and smiled While merriment amused and sense beguiled . Then fled the joy, alack ! that filled the heart! Saddened companions, see, we sit apart! Oh, day of wrath ! alas, the fateful hour! O'er all our eden blew a blighting wind Stifling and sickening spirit , bird and flower ; Sapping our souls , for we had sinned!—had sinned! Dark sorrow's dismal night enwrapped us round, Our once calm bosoms were despair's abode: No balm for the soul's healing could be found! Close by our bower the wraiths of unrest rode, Unbridled fears were loosed , remorse was calling From the dim distance ne'er-agains appalling . I knew that naught in me with this fell state could cope, So led my sickened love into the house of hope.          And there ---ah, there:          Gloom and despair!    Clad in th' habiliments of woe,       How helpless hope is lying,    Her lamp of life is burning low,       Her attendant sisters dying :    Faith fainting , finds , alas ! too late       Friendship's best bonds are interest,    And gray -robed death she doth await,       His coming deems a welcome guest.    Love lifts her eyes to heaven in prayer       While her brightest stars are paling ;    But a gleam of blessing finds she there       The earth's a place of wailing;    "Tho' the arms that clasped her yesterday       When all the world was green and bright    Are loosed and gone for aye -for aye ,       Slinking away beneath the night . Then pointed love aloft, her eyes in sorrowing gaze, We heard an angel -voice from out a golden haze, Say soft in accents soothing , gracious , kind --- Delicious as sweet -scented south-land wind: "Ah , man ! ah, woman ! for each wasted year May you atone, God says !-But 'tis not here. Forth from your eden ! Leave illusion land, Go to the struggling poor , weep round the bier , The lowly lift and dry misfortune's tear ! Of every race, each is your brother man: Try what your loving ministrations can. Encourage him, remove oppression's heel , And with each daily doing learn to feel . Work , man ! work, woman , without recompense , Nor expectant of reward or grateful sense! Work for the land's uplifting , for the right : For work alone leads back again to light. God's law for restoration , earthly neighbor , Of thy soul - joy again from grief is LABOR!
__label__political Of that same swarthy tint and hue, Of tales as thrilling and as true,    A pretty Desdemona He needs but then to tell them to,    To be a happy owner.  Of that same swarthy tint and hue, Of tales as thrilling and as true,    I am the happy owner; But I care not to tell them to A pretty Desdemona;    Some colored maid will do. 
__label__political Earth hath not one trampled mortal Whom an all-wise Maker gave Sense and reason but to foretell Him created a mere slave.  Races differ; but are equal. Since the flight of Time began, Each hath been some other's sequel In the forward march of Man.  Oh, my brothers better favored In this "Land of Liberty," Sorrow all the winds hath flavored 'Cross the gulf 'tween thee and me!  Must the answer be forever To our hopes, as it hath been, "Never, never, never, NEVER"?- Oh, the doleful repeten'!  O my soul, what fears assail it When that chilling word is said!-- "Never!" Oh, the night-winds wail it In their requiem o'er the dead!  "Never"!--foaming waters sob it To the wrecks along the shore:—- "Never"!--All the sad drums throb it. Marching to the battle's roar!  Say it not. Bar not, nor blight us: Send, from summits where ye dwell, Hopes, like torches, that may light us From the labyrinths of hell.  And, my comrade, do not waver, Tho' you be of trampled race, Claim your birth-right, without favor, "Till the world shall give you place.  Rise on visions sent to win you From your languor and duress; By the hope that lives within you, God hath called you to success.  O, if looms Life's mount before you, Towering terrible and vast; Threatening loud to topple o'er you, Muttering warnings of the past;  Do not tremble when you near it, To behold its awful height; Like the eagle, let thy spirit Soar above it, in its flight!   Rills of joy flow down that mountain, Gems of beauty cluster there; Thou canst quaff there of life's fountain, And breathe triumph in the air!  And when thou hast scaled the highest Peak in all that mountain-band, Help the comrade toiling highest Mount it from the table-land.  God is just; and, with his own hand, He will shape our destiny; If our future be in this land, Or in that beyond the sea.  Be it ours to watch and listen; Calmly ours to meditate; Brighter stars will rise and glisten, Tho' their coming seemeth late. 
__label__political I can not see why trials come,    And sorrows follow thick and fast; I can not fathom His designs,    Nor why my pleasures can not last, Nor why my hopes so soon are dust;           But I can trust.  When darkest clouds my sky o'erhang,    And sadness seems to fill the land, I calmly trust his promise sweet,    And cling to his ne'erfailing hand, And in life's darkest hour I'll just           Look up and trust.  I know my life with him is safe,    And all things still must work for good To those who love and serve our God,    And lean on him as children should. Though hopes decay and turn to dust,           I still will trust. 
__label__political Land of the mighty Dead! Here Science once display'd,    And Art, their charms; Here awful Pharaohs sway'd Great nations who obey'd; Here distant monarchs laid    Their vanquish'd arms.  They hold us in survey--  They cheer us on our way    They loud proclaim, From pyramidal hall,—- From Carnac's sculptur'd wall From Thebes they loudly call-    "Retake your fame!"  "All hail Liberia! Hail! Arise and now prevail    O'er all thy foes; In truth and righteousness In all the arts of peace Advance, and still increase,    Though hosts oppose."  At the loud call we rise And press towards the prize,    In glory's race; All redolent of fame, The land to which we came, We'll breathe the inspiring flame,    And onward press.  Here Liberty shall dwell, Here Justice shall prevail;    Religion here; To this, fair Virtue's dome Meek Innocence may come, And find a peaceful home,    And know no fear.  Oppression's cursed yoke, By freemen shall be broke—    In dust be laid; The soul erect and free, Here evermore shall be; To none we'll bend the knee    But Nature's God.  Proud Science here shall rear Her monuments, to bear    With deathless tongue; By nations yet unborn Her glories shall be known, And Art her tribute join,    The praise prolong.  Commerce shall lift her head, Th' auspicious gales shall spread    Expanded wing; From India's spicy land, From Europe's rock-bound strand, From Peru's golden strand    Her tribute bring.  Oh Lord! we look to Thee To Thee for help we flee,    Lord, hear our prayer! In righteousness arise, Scatter our enemies, Their hellish plots surprise    And drive them far!  O happy people they, Who Israel's God obey,    Whose Lord is God; They shall be blest indeed, From anxious cares be freed, And for them is decreed    A large reward. 
__label__political A perfect work, God made somewhere, I only know that thou art fair. Made of some priceless loom, and dyes He wrought you, flesh and hair and eyes For thou art fill'd with every rare And precious thing of earth, sky, air. The magical blue of warm June skies Gleams in your calm and sultry eyes; The unguent of the fragrant fields No sweeter, subtler perfume yields Than the aroma of your breath, Delicate fragrance attared 'neath The sculptured, firm white beauty of Your neck, arch'd so sweetly above The undulation of your breast Like ocean swells in slow unrest, With such exquisite motions act Like captious, yearning cataract, It seems from some sweet source to swell Full, passionate and musical. I would not praise too much your charms; The curvature of your fair arms; For the hand that modeled you Gave every line respective due. Laborious tho' his task begun. 'Twas pleasure when he viewed you, done. Whatever might his joy have been 'Tis confident he tried again To give you more than sculptured grace In lineaments of form and face. He tuned the strings of soul and sense To notes of soothing elegance; The quintessence of April's dream In varying moods of shade and sheen Tempered the phases of your mind. To fancies changeful as the wind. He gave you joy, the crown of life, Pure metal unalloyed with strife; And just enough of passion, too, To make you madd'ning thro' and thro'. But these mere words do ill supply The color to paint my visioned eye. The blended beauty in you, glows Of lily, violet and rose; The lily, symbol of thy pure Chaste, gracious soul; the lure Of spiritual radiance, which, Shrine you a saint in holy niche; But when endowed with saddened mien Apensive violet you seem, A tender, tearful, yearning child Of fragrant senses, frail and mild. And then, you too can turn to be Agorgeous rose divinity-- Love, life and passion smiling thro' The perfect fullness of your hue! 
__label__political Ay, black was the man, and black was the deed, But blacker by far was the lawless creed Of those lawless men with their faces white Who avenged the deed in the dead of night!  For black were the hearts of that howling mob, And worthy of Hades their fiendish job! A shudder of horror around the globe ran, At this beastly revertal of civilized man!  The earth holds no record of more barbarous scene, No wild, savage orgie in history's dark screen Surpasses in demon-like hatred and spite, The deed of those white men that shameful night.  And this, on Columbia's "land of the free!" Beneath the bright flag whose stars all decree A perfect equality, justice; above all Protection by law, until those stars fall!  And this, when we reprimand Russia, in sooth! And prate of our liberty, freedom and truth! The nations of earth point the finger of scorn At Columbia's banner, blood stained and torn!  Shame! shame on the brutes who let loose on the land This Spirit of Lawlessness! 'Twas Southern hand. First took up the fagot, the torch and the stake, And started these fires which 'twill take blood to slake.  Defiant of law, both of man and of heaven, They lynched and they roasted alive! Now this leaven Contagious is working; but God is not blind; They'll reap the wild whirlwind, who sow the wind! 
__label__political Again is heard the crying of the children in the night, They are praying to the Father to defend their legal right, They are praying him for justice swift against illegal might, Their race is marching on.  These children of the nation now are growing wise and strong, They have suffered long in silence, under selfish Southern wrong, But they know that rank injustice has been meted to them long, Their race is marching on.  Their rights by constitution have been quibbled quite away, The ballot taken from them so they ne'er can have fair play; They're accused and without trial are strung up the selfsame day, But their race is marching on.  It's "lynch 'em, lynch 'em, lynch 'em, there's no law for black men here," "Tar and feather, shoot, and burn 'em, there is nobody to fear;" "This is the white man's country and no niggers wanted near," But their race is marching on.  God's eye doth aye behold them, there's no "color line " on high, His ear is open to them, He hears every sob and cry; He sits in righteous judgment, every soul that sins shall die, Their race is marching on.  The mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small, It cost a millions lives or more to make the shackles fall; 'Twill cost a million lives again, the wormwood and the gall, Their race is marching on. 
__label__political I.  The highest aims forever live, And reach sublime events, They prophesy and they fulfil, And bring divine contents. Oh, town beside the purple bays, A tale of Lincoln here I bring to thee, in whose events Thine own high aims appear; For grow in life all grand intents. In noble thoughts and deeds, As Servius Tullius' hopes lived on And bloomed at Runnymeade.  II.  He turned away from crystal halls, And bowed himself in prayer, Lincoln, the commoner, beloved; A sergeant waited there. The door swung back; and Lincoln said, "The invader's arm is riven." "Whence comes the news?" the sergeant asked. "The message came from Heaven!" Once over our flag stood still the sun, Three nights were a day, and three days were one, That day was Gettysburg!  This morn to Heaven I raised my voice, "Give us thy power divine, And I the bondsmen's chains will break." Heaven said, "The field is thine." I stood in silence, came the word, "The battle has begun." And on the eastern windows burned The red midsummer sun.  III.  He walked alone the halls of state, Our Lincoln, the beloved; Afar the thunder clouds of fate The serried hilltops moved. But mustering hosts of blue brigades. He saw not, clear nor dim; When forth the mighty columns passed ' Twas history past to him. Once over our flag stood still the sun, Three nights were a day, and three days were one, That day was Gettysburg!  IV.  Another day the heavens rend, Earth's axle bends and sways, On three times fifty thousand men, Two hundred cannon blaze, No soldier knew what night would bring To that uncharted field, To him who sought Heaven's council hall It was alone revealed.  V.  When Pickett's men had cleft the fields, Hills leaped in horror dire, They stood like men with lifted shields, While the gray lava's fire Sunk into ashes, thin and pale, Then swift the heroes formed And all the wavering force assailed That, baffled, force had stormed. Once over our flag stood still the sun, Three nights were a day, and three days were one, That day was Gettysburg!  VI.  The meteor flag that flashed from Heaven, Then lightened in the cloud, And 'neath the skies thrice thunder -riven The Alleghaneys bowed. July the third; the cloud wings reft Revealed again the sun; The skies of Liberty shone clear, And those three days were one.  VII.  Lincoln! To consecrate the field, To Gettysburg he came, As on that morn when earth stood still In Heaven's arrested flame. The blue brigades around him pressed, As they had ever done, And waited for the prophet's word, Ten thousand men as one. Once over our flag stood still the sun, Three nights were a day, and three days were one, That day was Gettysburg!  VIII.  Care-worn, he bent on them his face, The centuries were there, 'Twas thinner than that hour when Heaven Its message sent through prayer. He spake: "The dead have given this spot The glory that is due, That the Republic perish not, Let us to them be true!  IX.  O Gettysburg! O Gettysburg! O day of days sublime, That made new destinies for men And set the clock of time. 'Twas that worn face that summoned Heaven His heroes to enfold, And saw the hosts invisible Like the young king of old.  X.  Helpers invisible there are That prophet souls may know, O'er them night's silver irises Of apperception glow. The earth revolves in spirit zones, And circles spirit spheres, And oft life's choral overtones Are heard by saints and seers, So over our flag stood still the sun, Three nights were a day, and three days were one, That day was Gettysburg.  XI.  On Seminary Ridge increase The fruited fields of fall, And far the Susquehanna gleams Beneath her mountain wall. Peace lifts her white hand in the heaven, Above each turf- ribbed hill Where on the day with thunder riven The sun of fate stood still.  XII.  Such is my tale of Gettysburg, But, Barrington, to thee, An hundred years before, God spake That thou thy bondmen free, And here where Williams breathed the word That conscience throned to rule, Where Myles for liberal knowledge made Each cabin home a school,  XIII.  The silver trump of freedom blew, In life's diviner air, And thence Emancipation grew To power in Lincoln's prayer. From here went freedom on her march That human victories won, Until o'er Gettysburg's grand arch Our Prophet held the sun.  XIV.  O, town beside the purple bays, That build in life's diviner air, To-day we see thy ancient ways, The high creative power of prayer. Thy past has larger dowers to give, To all mankind in word and deed, So Servius Tullius still doth live In memories of Runnymeade.  XV.  To Lincoln's faith at Gettysburg Let us our pledge renew, A Genius noble summons us, Time's work supreme to do. Come, Oh thou Diva, come and bring The gifts the building ages sing, To man his birthright, toil a field, To need a largess true, To each the justice of the state, To all the wealth that they create, To him who toils, his due. So shall we live in gems enscrolled Like those who broke the chains of old. 
__label__political I.   The city, Washington, D. C., That day wuz in its glory-- It 'peared like Paradise to me, All beauteous spread before me:  II.  An' arter trampin' heaps an' heaps, I see, to crown my joys, Whar Uncle Sammy Yankee keeps His school fer witty boys.  III  I rapped; Sam opened wide the door; Invited me to come in. Sez he: "In jest a minute more, The boys'll be a-summin."  IV.  So, I goes in, an' takes a seat; Thinks I: "How nice this place An' ain't it promisin' to meet So many bright young faces?"  V.   I see two gents uv learned a'r  A-workin' in the room thar'; S'I: "Uncle Sam, who be them thar?  'Pears like I've seen 'em somewhar'"  VI.  "Them is our lecturers," he sez "Renown men in our nation, The great Professor Prejudice, An' Dr. Degradation."  VII.  S'I: "Whut them tryin' to do?" Sez Sam: "To settle whut they're'n doubt uv, They're cuttin ' up a colored man, To see whut he's made out uv.  VIII.  "The plain fact is, you see, my guest. To-day our lesson figures On workin' out the plan that's best To elevate the niggers.  IX.  "An' soon's we find the difference Between the black an' white men, It's plain to see, by common sense, That things 'll start off right then."  X.  "Yes, I'm convinced," sez Prejudice, "That we'll the line discover We'll strike it pretty soon, I guess; Jest help me roll 'im over."  XI.  They found a heart, a brain, a soul— P—- whispers, pale with wonder, "D—-, ef this is the man we stole, We're snowed completely under!"  XII.  "Lor', look!" sez Degradation," run It's monstrously surprisin ', But, arter all that has been done, The nigger is a- risin'!"  XIII.  An' then, I swan, you orter seen Them thar' two fellers hurry Outen that school-room, lookin' mean An' quarrelin' like ole fury.  XIV.  I watched 'em long, uz they ferlorn, Fur down the road wuz goin'; An' then I woke, an' it wuz morn The roosters wuz a-crowin'.  XV.  You see, I'd been nowhar' at all, Except in bed, a-dreamin', But still, I've let the story fall Jest uz to me 't was seemin'.  XVI.  I never holds no malice 'g'in' No one-one way ner 't other; But still, it shorely ain't no sin To dream an' tell it, brother. 
__label__political Give me a hymn of praises,    From early morn till late; A song to rouse the nations,    A song to Afric's Great. With melody to equal,    The minstrels of the sea; To ride upon the breezes    O'er lofty mount and lea.  With graces from the Muses,    I'd sing a stirring song; To tell the world our virtues,    And lift above the wrong. A balm to sooth the sorrows,    'Twould drive away all tears; To live throughout the ages,    Like music of the spheres.  The birds that sing so sweetly    In yonder greenwood tree; With joyful notes of gladness,    Would list a while to me. In that hymn, full of praises    From early morn till late, That song to rouse the nations,    That song to Afric's Great. 
__label__political Twas on a bright midsummer morn, The sun sent down its hottest ray, And parched the blades of growing corn, And turned the verdant grass to hay, That old Aunt Susan, hat in hand, Rushed into "Squire Tatem's " store; (Twas in Virginia, understand, In those bright days soon aft' the war, When every vote was counted right, When Truth and Justice had the sway, And magistrates were black, not white Before the "New South " had its way ).  "Oh! Br'er Tatem, giv' me quick Er warrant fur Glen Barney's ' ress, Glen beat my gal wid dis yere stick, An' throwed her down an' tored her dress, An' rushed at me wid er big knife, An' chased me 'round de ole hog pen, An' threatened fur ter take my life, So, Br'er Tatem, please ' ress Glen!"  It happened on that very day, The constable, young Frederick Bright, Had called to pass the time away, In talking politics till night; But when he heard Aunt Susan tell Of this wild outlaw's thirst for gore, The brave young fellow's courage fell; He quickly started for the door.  "Come back, young man!" the Justice cried, ("And you go home now, Sister Brown.") The frightened officer replied: "I can't, I've got to go to town." "Come back and serve this warrant, Bright; You must not shirk from duty, Fred. Find Barney if it takes all night, And bring him here alive or dead.  "I'll show that fellow he can't do Just as he please while I'm aroun ' When he's in jail he'll sadly rue The day he threatened Sister Brown." Poor Freddy wished ten times or more He'd stayed at home upon that morn, Instead of coming to the store,- He also wished Glen ne'er was born.  He sadly read the warrant through: "July the 16th, 72, Virginia County, Princess Ann "To Frederick Bright I here command " (Which reads as near as rhyme can tell), "Whereas, One Glenmore Barney fell, Upon one Susan Brown with knife, And threatened he would take her life, And badly beat the plaintiff's daughter, Then threw her down in mud and water, And otherwise did show his hate For all the laws of this good State, That I command you, Frederick Bright, To bring before me, here to-night, The body of the said Glenmore Barney, to be tried by law, With seal affixed, my name you see, Moses Tatem, a J. P.  So Freddy filled his pistols three, And took the handcuffs from the store, Got on his horse with trembling knee, And started out to find Glenmore. (To the warrior it may be Endless glory, as 'tis said, After fighting for the free, To get a bullet in his head.) Still, every sound made Freddy start As on he rode with bated breath. Our hero knew lead in the heart Meant only now a fameless death.  At last he reached the "Taylor Farm" Where wicked Barney's deeds were done. He threw the handcuffs 'cross his arm, And cocked and primed his ready gun. As up he rode before him stood, A pretty maid, with yellow face,  And Fred cried out: "The wretch who would Harm such beauty, doth disgrace The name of man, and is a brute. To drown him would pollute much water, And powder's wasted if I shoot,- For is not this Aunt Susan's daughter?"  "Where is that Glenmore Barney now?" He yelled, (for beauty made him brave ) "Where is the cur, for here I vow To send him to a timely grave!" "My name is Glen - Glendelia, sir," Replied the maid of golden hue, "How dare you class me as a cur?" "What! You Glen Barney! Is it true?"  He looked into her eyes of black, As there he sat on steed of white; Out went his heart; she sent her's back, 'Twas as of yore -love at first sight. 'Twas "Maud" again, and country Judge, Of schoolboy lore and world renown, "Rich repiner and household drudge," Our "Maud" was yellow, our "Judge "was brown.  Law knows not love; love knows not law, Still Fred remembered why he came. So he resolved without a flaw, To do his duty, just the same. "Well, Glen - that is Miss Barney, I Am very sorry it is true, But tell the truth, the reason why I came down here, is after you.  "This morning, old Aunt Susan Brown, Rushed into 'Squire Tatem's store, And had him write this warrant down, Which puts you in the hands of law." Frederick read the warrant through, The maiden listened with a smile. "I beat her daughter, it is true, Because she called me names most vile."  "Then, as my prisoner you must go With me up to the 'Squire's store, Just tell him all the facts you know, And have no fear about the law." With arms akimbo, Miss Glen said, The fire flashing in her eye, "Before I'll go, I'll be shot dead, I will resist until I die.  "What, go to jail for old Aunt Sue, And her old gal, Maria Brown? I will not go for them or you, Nor all the constables in town!" "But Glen, you know the warrant said, (I read it through without a flaw ) That I must take you, live or dead, You know, dear girl, that is the law.  "I'll get a buggy for you, Glen, And drive you with the utmost care, Pray, for my sake, will you go then? You'll come out right, so never fear. Go for my sake, my pretty maid, I vow you'll never go to jail, Oh, trust me, do not be afraid, For I will freely stand your bail."  Glendelia smiled, and so did Bright, And then she said she'd go, but walk. This gave the constable delight, And also gave him time to talk. So ere they reached Judge Tatem's store, The constable a story told, The same old story as of yore, The story that will ne'er grow old.  It only took five minutes ' time Before the learned Justice read: "Glendelia Barney did no crime, When she resented what was said. She only did the things she should, When she was called that wicked name. Why, Sister Brown, I know you would, And so would I, have done the same.  "The case's dismissed, the prisoner's free, This calling names is wicked sport, The plaintiff losing, as you see, Must settle all the costs of court." The constable walked off with Glen, And here we might as well just say Before we throw aside our pen, He married her on Christmas Day. 
__label__political Her limbs in chain From cross the Main By Slaver brought To Freedom's shore, By art untaught, Of savage Lore, And simple thought--    Africa.  Of massive frame, Of patient mood, She reeks no blame,  But wears her yoke-- For others' good. To plow, to hoe, To sing, to sow, To plant, to toil On others' soil--    Africa.  In cotton rag, With cotton bag, To pick the boll, And sing the while, From dawn to dark. In cabin bare, A Spartan's fare, She waits till dawn--    Africa  Her fetich lore Here now forgot, She learns to pray Her captor's way-- To laugh, to speak, To jest, to weep, In Freedom's land--    Africa.   To raise her brood, To chew her cud, In Stoic mood- The under sill, The stone as mill, She waits on God- (And Appomattox)    Africa.  Black shoulders bare, The burden there A Nation's load- She tills—and toils, Nor reçks of spoil, Enduring all- This Atlas-    Africa.   Her heart grew warm As her skin was black, And of love for her captors In that heart was no lack. And she loved her own, And still loved them For the milk of her kindness O'erflowed at the brim. Then the land grew angry And the lightnings flashed, Of the cannon's mouthings And the bayonet's dash. Then the land was still And the soil was red As silent and mourning They huried their dead.  But God heard her prayer and God heard her song In the wide field of cotton and the corn rows long, For He moved on His throne and His bright glory shone, For in all His wide Dominions shall His will be done.  Then Africa looked to the God of her trust And wept for she felt that her God was just- Then Africa looked in the face of her brood, And rejoiced for she felt that God was good.
__label__political There came a dark youth singing in the dawn Of a new freedom, to a mellow lyre, Refining, as with touch of an Apollo's fire, The songs a lowly people sang upon A toilsome way. The night of gloom was gone; He stood, full-throated, cheering son and sire To garner grain, despising rain and mire Of yesternight. "To-day," he sang, "toil on And up, my race, from vale toward glory's crest!" Men marvelled at the singer, strong and sweet. He left the forest, drenched with storms of night, And faced the morning, beautiful with light, To die while shadows still fell toward the west, And leave his laurels at a people's feet.
__label__political I. I sat at eve, as the sun sunk low, And the shadows grew, and the dark came down, Where the sea moved restlessly to and fro, At the foot of a dreamy, old, picturesque town, And I listened and dreamt to the sea's mournful sound, And my heart beat heavy and sad and slow As the waves that moaned on the sands below, While the ships went by, and the night fell 'round.  II. And I thought of the friendships that faded away, And the lost hopes that left me so sad and alone; Ambitions that towered and fell to decay; And many a loved one, long silent and gone,- Dear virtues, as pure as the clouds that looked down, So, white, o'er that dreamy, old, picturesque town;- And my heart beat heavy and sad and slow, As I turned the dim leaves of the dear long ago, And watched the ships pass, as the night fell 'round.  III. And I thought, as the ghoulish dark crept o'er the land, Of a sweet, dreamy face, like the meadows in May; And the soft, thrilling touch of a pretty, brown hand; And a love that died as the beautiful day Had perished that night, in that heedless old town, - With its spires all white, and its hills all brown;- But my dream died, too, in its bed of woe, And the waves made its dirge on the sands below, While the weird shadows strove with the darkness all 'round.  IV. The stars came silently out up above, To watch o'er the grave of the beautiful day; And the moon, a proud creature, too cold for our love, Came, veiling her face, in a mystical way; And, roaming the still sky, looked wondering down On me—and that dreamy, old slumbering town, And my heart's blood froze, as I sat there alone, And heard the waves chanting their requiem-like tone, While the dim ships, like phantoms, went past on the sound.  V. I sat there, and looked at night's banner unfurled, With all its rich beauties and wonders so rare; And I thought that each star was a happier world, And confess that I longed, like a child, to be there, Where the holy ones pity us, as they look down On our Earth, with her many a sin-blinded town, And hearts that beat heavy and sad and slow, 'Till they break and fail, and unheeded go, While the world moves on in the same old round.  VI.  Then I railed against Christ, as I sat there alone, For blinding the world with His weak fairy tale; And I wondered why God, on His thunder-girt throne, Allowed useful lives and their strivings to fail;- And I told the great God to His teeth that He lied! That they who best served Him mankind crucified- And weary and heart-sore and crazed with despair I paced the bleak seashore, and muttered a prayer To the winds!—but it died in the chill evening air.  VII. Away in the midnight, I made me a prayer, And sent it to God, on His beautiful throne, - The calm moonlight slept in the deep, silver air; But the moon glittered coldly and proudly alone, And the stars, twinkling high in the blue sky, looked down Like pitying eyes o'er that desolate town,-- When my prayer came back, on its pinions of snow, That beat the still air into music below, And my soul was amazed at the peace it had found.  VIII. Then I spake to the Lord, as I journeyed along, "Dear God, Thou hast sent me a blessing in tears; I only can give Thee the poor, broken song Of a soul that hath found Thee thro' doubts and thro' fears; But, break my heart, Lord, and, if balm Thou should'st find, Give it, in mercy, to erring mankind." And I heard the low words, as they issued in air, Borne off on the wings of my hovering prayer, And the night grew glad with its lingering there. 
__label__political Stop! O, Nation, stop and listen! Listen with your heart and brain, Hear the weird Voice of the Negro, Coming up from Southern plain : From the brakes of Louisiana, From the fields of whit’ning grain, From the lees of Mississippi, Listen, as it comes again.  Not for social recognition, Not for alms this Voice is rife. For this, and only this 'tis pleading-- A man's chance in the race of life. For an equal chance to labor, And honest pay for honest toil; Give this, and by the God who made us, We'll win success on Southern soil.   We still have hope, tho' darkness lowers, And tbunders spread their dread alarms; Faith in the best blood of the Southland, Faith in the strength of our own arms, Faith in the truth, tbo’crushed and bleeding; That justice in man's heart still dwells, We'll kiss the rod, then rise and labor, God reigns above, and all is well.
__label__political Despair and darkness veils the rugged way    That winds o'er crag and barren plain and moor, Where plods the fearless freedman day by day,    Up to the open door.  Through the wide portals beacons break the gloom    Now shadows flee, the night is almost o'er And in the gloaming dusky freedom loom    With faith, simple and pure.  O, cruel fate that beckons and betrays,    'That shatters hope and fair forebodings dim, All, all seems lost, labor of nights and days,    The door is barred to him.  Exile or alien from far distant shores,    Find a warm welcome wait their wiles or wares, While noble natives languish at the doors,    Denied their honest shares.  Relent, arrogant censors, heed his call,    Nor mock his pains nor mimic his sad plight, Your fate is tempted by his rise or fall    Rather than by your might.  Let then the portals open full and free,    The lustrous light its obscure threshold bare, Merit alone should be the master key,    Let all the worthy share. 
__label__political What a cost to be pure! did it e'er strike your mind That the gold so much prized in the fire was refined? And the pearls of the deep by the divers are found, At the peril of life their successess are crowned ?  Yea, the trees of the orchard the pruner must know, If they bring forth the best of the fruit that can grow; And the knife is applied to the vine ev'rywhere, For production, of grapes that are luscious and rare.  Thus in life we are taught by the pain and the loss, That the road to the crown is by way of the cross; Christians pass through the furnace, the Savior to gain, For with Him if they suffer, with Him shall they reign.  We may weep for a night but the morn bringeth joy, Then the songs of rejoicing our tongues will employ; Ev'ry storm that ariseth at some time must end, Then the rainbow of promise and peace will attend.  Ev'ry soul must afflictions and trouble endure, As the gold must be tried, so the soul to be pure, As the pearl is secured at the peril of life, So the soul in its triumph must pass through the strife.  Like the Savior who suffered and went to His rest, Must His servants on earth find the home of the blest, There to tell Him the story of how in the past They suffered the crosses and are crowned at the last.
__label__political Ye who have the vision, ye who know the plan Of the stretch of empire o'er the haunts of man—  Ye who claim dominion far as man can reach, What are these wild doctrines that at home ye teach?  What is this new notion of the lust of laws, Sheltered by your ensign, bargained for your cause?  Farther yet and farther spreads the eagle's wing, Louder yet your triumph bids the heathen sing;  Farther yet and farther do your footsteps go, Each new day a harvest of the seed ye sow.  Ye who now are seeking daily for your need, What is this ye harbor? What is this ye breed?  This new hope of glory, this one great desire, Daily growing fatter 'neath your altar fire?  What are these new statutes legislators make? Strive they old foundations of your code to shake?  What is this proscription, what these brazen bars— What this fearful fact, sirs, of the jim-crow cars?  Whence these gods of fury, at whose feet ye bow, Relics of past ages ruling o'er us now?  One of your strong poets, virile and of sight, Saw the fearful image, piteous in its plight,  Of a man of might, with muffled undertone, Rolling, rolling, rolling up the hill a stone.  All the agitation, all the strife and woe, All the stress and tumult forty years ago,  Left this mighty problem, covering all our land Will ye crush the Negro or for justice stand?  Was it idle speaking, was it platitude, Do we bend the meaning, dim the magnitude  Of the Declaration, which with good intent Said some things most truly were self-evident?  Wherefore all its teachings do ye fail to heed? Wherefore let ye folly wreck that noble creed?  Life is still unchanging; what ye craved for then Craveth still the heart-throbs of a million men;  All ye fain would teach us by a sterner hand, Do our minds beclouded fail to understand?  Ye who have the vision, ye who know the way, Hear the mighty millions, singing as they pray  Heed the word the dubious present prophesies List the music-making as the toilers rise,  Toiling with their faces turned upon the sun, Rising yet more Godward when the day is done.  Ye who have the vision of the mighty hand, Will ye crush the Negro or for justice stand?  Ye who have the gospel, ye who know the law, Worship ye the night or what your fathers saw? 
__label__political Dar's many t'ings dat's done been changed sence de yankees fit an' died: De black man's heart ain't jes' de same, His mouf don't stretch so wide.  I often wondahs will dey come, Dem good ol' days I love I long ter see 'em heah below Befo' I goes above.  Dar, wa'n't no talk in dem ol' days 'Bout two kinds of edication: H'm! All we knowed wuz how ter pray An' work de ol' plantation!  De li'l' brats waz glad ter play Aroun' deir mammy's knees, But now dey runs about de streets An' does jes' ez dey please.  An' me an' Sue done notice how, W'en we's a-gwine ter meetin', De w'ite folks dey jes' pass on by Widout one friendly greetin'.  I 'spec's de mules dey feels de change, Sence de days dat's done gone by: Dar's sorrer in deir mou'nful looks, An' now dey don't kick so high.  It may be we has 'vantages Ouah daddies nevah saw But I jes' longs fer dem ol' days--- De days befo' de wah! 
__label__political I.  Upon a flatboat, floating with the tide Ofa great river, a young boatman stands, Lofty of brow; great-hearted; in his hands An oar to steer his craft. On either side Of the broad river, sees he, stretching wide, The waving corn fields and the cotton lands Where slaves toil in the sun. One whose commands They do, rides, whip in hand, with brutal pride, And smites, with bloody, lacerating rod, Their naked backs 'till crimson shows. "Oh, God!" Cries the tall woodsman," if thou hast a plan To free these bondmen, hath the earth a son To execute it, Father---even one?" God's angel whispered: "Aye! thou art the man."  II  In after years a mighty statesman stood Where two roads parted, pondering the way. Over one road the seeming light of day Streamed; dark the next road looked, and little good.--- The roads were Self and Human Brotherhood. Self wound thro' scenes of glory, bright and gay, While Brotherhood's high lights seemed ashen gray. He might have chosen as a mortal would, But for a vision sent him from above: Again he heard the bondmen's wailing cry In white fields stretching by a river dim; Again God's angel came to plead with him. Knowing it meant, perchance, that he must die, He turned from Self to Brotherhood and Love. 
__label__political Like winter's drifted snowflakes hoar That tossed in old sleigh bells, The dainty flakes of cotton white Are rocking in tawny shells.  There's music in the snowy lint Strains that the bondmen sang; The doleful notes of the black man's grief That once through the cotton-fields rang.  The melodies echo at the morn A medley of bliss and woe When Southern breezes are astir And through the white fields blow.  Ah, innocent plant of cotton white, Stretching from shore to shore, Though thou didst give our kinsmen Thou art the King, as of yore!
__label__political Brothah Johnson, I'se been lis'nin' At yo' preachin' in dis town, And fur Goodniss' sake I tell you You mus' turn yo' preachin' 'roun '.  'Pears to me dat you ain't 'quaintid Wid de t'ings we uns like; Ef you wuz, I tell you, brothah, Quite a dif'ent note you'd strike.  Ain't I hyeahed you say in meetin' Dat ol' torment's b'ilin' hot, An' dah ain't no place fur skatin' Whar de worm dieth not?  Well, I tell you now we black folks Is all dead in love wid fiah, An' de warmes' sorter weathah Is de kind we all desiah.  An' you oughtah know, my brothah, Ef you wants to save a soul, You mus' tell 'em in yo' preachin' Dat ol' hell is mighty col'! 
__label__political You kin talk about yo ' dinnahs Dat you think so rich an' gran ', An' yo ' eatin' things in cou'ses While dah's music by de ban '; But I tell you d'ain't no cookin' Like de cookin ' usetah be In de good ol' days uv slav'ry 'Fo' de darkies wuz set free.  Yas; it's true -yo' stoves an' ranges Gives a monst'ous lot er heat, But I'se one dat's hyeah to tell you Dey cooks nothin' fit to eat; Why, dey ain't a huckle -berry To de open fiahplace, Whar ol' mammy done de cookin' Jes' to suit de fines' tas'e.  We had ash-cake, an' had hoe-cake; We had 'taters an ' punkin pie; We had 'possum baked in gravy, An' we sho wuz livin ' high! We had cabbage an' fat bac'n, We had hoppin' John's and sich, An' dah ain't no use in talkin' Things wuz cooked to suit Miss Mitch!  Den we had de best er health, too, In dem plain an' happy days, W'en we stood so close to Natur' Dat we follahed Natur's ways. All dese aches an' pains an' doctahs Dat has sprung up ev'ywhar Would be all as dead as Hectah Ef we cooked like 'fo' de war.  Go 'long, braggin' 'bout yo' dinnahs Dat you say is rich an' gran', An' yo' eatin' things in cou'ses While dah's music by de ban'; But I'se sho d'ain't no cookin' Like de cookin' usetah be In de good ol' days uv slav'ry 'Fo' de darkies wuz set free. 
__label__political De driftin' snow done lef' de groun'— I's glad it couldn't stay; De welcome sun is in de sky, An' spring is on de way.  'Fo long de bull-frawg in de pawn Gwi' soun ' his sunset strain, An ' den we's gwi' be trampin' roun' In Ap'ul mud and rain.
__label__political Dah's music 'nuff to go aroun', An ' all kin sing who will. De spring -bird sendin' fo'th his soun', An' vi'lets peepin 'f'um de groun', Dey all-dey all is duty boun' Yo' cup er joy to fill.  Uv cou'se, sometimes, we's 'bliged to sigh, But all kin sing who will. De sorrers an' de griefs dat fly Ez thick ez blackbirds in de rye, Dey all is gwi' make by -an'-by De joy more sweetah still.  De darkes' night er brightes' day, Yas, all kin sing who will. De shadders dat in de valleys stray, An' make de worl' no longer gay, Dey all is soon gwi' run away, 'Cause sunshine's on de hill. 
__label__political In wintah-time an' summah, too—    She my ol' 'oman still! Ter her I's sho'ly gwine be true    She my ol' 'oman still! W'en sorrers circle 'roun' de do', An' dark clouds hang a li'l' low, Her smiles jes' melts 'em, an' dey go    She my ol' 'oman still! Her face is wrinkled, teef all gone    She my ol' 'oman still! De white, white locks her head ado'n    She my ol' 'oman still! Sometimes she look at me an' say She's ol' an' only in de way, An' den I say, "Yo' heart is gay "—    She my ol' 'oman still! An' w'en de message come ter part    She my ol' 'oman still! An' good ol' wife ter heaben start    She my ol' 'oman still! 'Cause out, dar 'neaf de col' col' groun', While yeahs an ' yeahs dey circle 'roun', Tell' fo' de th'one heaben we's found--    She my ol''oman still!
__label__political Like as a stream with ice-gorge chok'd and pent, Moves imperceptibly its way along, Beneath whose surface, full, and free, and strong, Sweeps the swift current, still to seaward bent, Bearing with it each vain impediment With which the dastard strives its course to stay, And make it stagnant with young Hope's decay; So now upon the selfsame continent Whose sons a glory-crown'd defiance hurl'd At Britain for her tried enslaver's arts, A Race its wing-ed, aspiration furl'd. Till the right time, and now to life it starts, And this brave Movement, nurs'd in bravest hearts, Bursts with Niagara's thunder on the world.
__label__political O my, dat sun   Jes cooked me done, De air so clos' Done did his mos' To smudder us Widout afuss Doan' yo' t'ink it's gwine t'rain?  Well, dar's a cloud, It's thund'rin' loud, De air's began  T'wo'k an' fan An' feels right good—- I wisht it w'u'd Doan 'yo ' t'ink it's gwine t'rain?  I'm gettin 'ta'd, De wo'k so ha'd; Please Mistah Rain Do cum again 'K'ase we so so' Kain't do no mo'--- Doan' yo' t'ink it's gwine t'rain? 
__label__political They brought me, tempting - red, Life's richest wine, The mad thirst four hundred years did create, My soul was maddened with desire to sate, At one draught, deep-drawn, vital and divine; I lifted with passionate haste and nigh, The Cup of Knowledge to my famished lips, Like hungry flames unchecked in stubble dry, Athrough my veins red riot to the tips. The æons that my soul, like smothered flames, Burned with fierce ardor wild and was restrained, My soul in silence cherished mighty aims, And longed to tread in fields then unattained; At last enfreed I stood in manhood's peace Full conscious of my soul's divine release.
__label__political Nay, once I have not seen the sea, nor know, By long familiar ear, her varying mood, And passionate swell , but here upon this rood, I found this gypsy bard of hers and, lo! Close -fitted to my ear, in gratitude, It murmurs of its far-off parent flow. O, wander Sprite! what Viking fortitude Left thee, stranded waif, achance wind's blow? I am a Shell, far from my native shore; Unlike thee, gypsy bard, my long exile Has made my native speech remembered vain; Here self-communing thou and conning o'er With insane ecstacy thy ancient style, The while another's tongue relates my pain.
__label__political O Thou who heard the wailful plea Of our forebears on bended knee, And broke their bonds and set them free;    To Thee we pray,    To Thee we pray.  In broken word and wailing tone, In deep, unutterable groan, They made their tribulations known.    Hear us, we pray,    Hear us, we pray.  In this dark day of sore distress, In deepest gloom of wilderness, When threat'ning ills so hardly press;    Help us this day,    Help us this day.  If scorn and race disdain would seek Its vial of wrath to venge and wreak Upon this lowly folk and meek,    Spare us, we pray,    Spare us, we pray.  No people yet have fallen prey, Who love Thy Law, walk in the way, When all the world could look and say:    "Behold, they pray,    "Behold. they pray."  But when we stray from Thy command. And feel Thy sore afflicting hand, We humbly bow; we understand,    We must obey,    We must obey.  If some Thy saving help deny, With wild, inane, distracted cry, Like Job's wild wife, would curse and die,    Forgive, we pray,    Forgive, we pray.  If time-taught wisdom nostrums find, In cunning hand or knowing mind, Show the blind leaders of the blind,    'Tis vanity,    'Tis vanity.  Thy righteous Law is all our trust, Who builds on else but builds on dust; The Mighty should, the Lowly must    Rely alway,    Rely alway.  And since of stones Thou raiseth seed As choice as any boasted breed, Vouchsafe to us the larger meal.    We humbly pray,    We humbly pray.       Amen. 
__label__political I hear a voice,--a plaintive, patient sound,    A whisper low, A murmur soft, steals all around,    Heard oft before.  That sound, earth-born now rises to the skies,    Fills all the air With yearning to be heard that never dies,    Goes everywhere.  Not from the beggars' idle task,    It comes to you, 'Tis from the hearts of freemen--men who ask    But Justice true.  That voice-soul cry of an awakening host    Calls for its own, It stalks right in like Banquo's ghost,    Will not "begone!"  Ye rulers of a state, did ye not hear    His passive plea? Wilt turn deaf ear to plaintive prayer,    Which calls to thee?  Oh! Nation great--let memory bear thee back    To earlier days When struggled thou on war's relentless rack,    In fearful phase.  In those dark days, when in the balance hung    The fair young life Thy honor, by this voice not once was stung    With treason's rife.  The owner of that voice, thy armies fed,    He toiled for thee On countless fields of war he fought and bled,    'Till thou wert free.  When slavers base, with thy permission made    His life a hell, This voice was never heard thee to upbraid,    It wished thee well.  O country proud--with undying boast    Of Liberty, Wilt thou, with thy victorious vaunting host,    An ingrate be?  I dreamed long since that voice had lost its tone    Of beggars' plea, And in my sleep me thought that voice did scorn    To not be free.  I heard once more its stirring sounds again,    Its summons grand, Its call brought forth ten thousand black-faced men    At its command.  It begged no more, but sounded in its power,    O'er all the earth, And bondsmen hailed the crucial hour    Of Freedom's birth. 
__label__political Why stand ye there face down, strong man? Lamenting o'er the years thou'st spent Inserving paler men their plan;  In paying meaner men their rent;  In hiring weaker men thy arm; Those men who send abroad alarm The danger thou dost threaten them  Of equal craving for the light To see the wrong, its tide to stem , To live a man and wield thy might?  Lament not o'er the time thou'st lost  In loving men who show their hate For thee and thine,and keep the cost Of friendship where to reach the rate Thou must unman thyself of thought And hope and pride, of ideals wrought Soul deep byloving angels touch.  They may all go the truth to give: Both they and it are not worth much  Compared with God and life to live.  In thee is ev'ry function right  Of head and heart and hand; 'tis true! Confide to them thy will, and blight The source which holds to thee the View Of endless serfdom for thy years. Lament no more! Clear up thy tears! Lift up thy drooping form and head! The hour has come to think, to stır, To work. Thy friends are all not dead. God reigns to yet thy foes deter.
__label__political Thou Black, with matchless strength, wake up! These years of untold schemes to keep Thee drinking bitters from the cup Of Servitude, and thus to sleep, Have kept thy soul and mighty brain From joining in life's sweet refrain. Wake up!  Look to the light beyond the hills Bright shining in resplendent hues; Look to the mighty deed that stills The wailing of the Russian Jews; Look high to God, the Prince of Peace Who speaks, and men their warfares cease. Look up!  Enter thy protests full and strong 'Gainst those whose hands thy treasure rob 'Gainst those who bind thee down by wrong And in their mean enslaving orb Consign thee to a place with herd. Assert thyself! Speak out thy word! Contend!  By that which others make the goal, You're made: gold, land, and learning true, A loving heart, a quickeu'd soul, The earth a full commanding view. Wake up! Look up! And, hard contend For that the ages cannot rend. And live. 
__label__political Deah Dinah ain't you heahed de news 'bout dat ar culud man,  Way up No'th, wot come' long, an' 'scivered Caanian lan'? "Why lordy, Eph'm, I ain't heahed nuthin' kase ah'se not bin out; G-o-n-e, Honey, an ' tell yoah Dinah, wot it am all 'bout."  You see, Dinah, way up yondah somewhars 'roun' 'bout New York town, Why dar's a pow'ful trac ' o' lan' wot dis heah man's done foun', An' ez he 'us heap mo' smart den seb'd cullud men would bin, He tuk de chance to raise de fun's, an' den he sot rite in.  Yas, he bought up forty lev'n doz'n acres o' dat lan', Now, Dinah, don't you think we'd bettah start soon ez we can? Why dar'll be nuthin ' but cullud fo'ks fo ' to rule dat country thu'; My! dat beats Abe Linkum, Dinah, glory hallerlu!  Cullud preachers, cullud teachers, an' a big, fat cullud jedge, Wid a gang o' cullud 'p'licemuns dat'll nebbah break de pledge; Cullud juries sett'n 'round ' jes proud ez any Zah, A- lis'nin' to dose lawyahs wot's a pleadin' at de bah.  "An' Eph'm, Honey, wlll a cullud Mayor hab de 'trollin' o' dat lan'?" Ya , Dinah Deah, an ' dar'll be a liddle cullud ban'; An' strutt'n 'hind dat cullud ban', all up an ' down de hill, Will be de lublies cullud gals , all drest up fit ter to kill.  Some a-coat'n , some a-spoat'n , oh ! dem royal sons o' Ham, Cullud sojer boys, Deah Dinah, toat'n flags o' Uncle Sam; An' dey'll hab a cullud fiah 'trole , wid a big chief roustabout, A-gittin' to de place jes 'bout de time de fiah am out.  Dahkeys running' 'lectic cahs, aflyin' froo de ahr. W-h-o-e-e! Wid dair conductahs gwine' roun' a-leckin' up yoah fahr. W-h-o-e-e! An' dey'll hab a Dahkey Constable, a-sett'n 'pon a stool, A-seein' dat de fo'ks carries out de County's rule.  An' in dat lan' of co'n an' wine, 'cross on Long Islun' Soun’, Wot lawyah Rufus Perry, he done struggled fo ' to foun', Ah 'clar 'twill be a par dice fo' eny cullud man Now, Dinah, don't you think we'd bettah start soon ez we can?"
__label__political WHEN you is feelin' drowsy, An' bags, deys comin' in, Wid bell boys rushin' right an' lef', 'Midst de mawnin's busy din,  An' you wuz out de night befo', A callin' on yo' gal, An' met by chance some friends ob yourn, Maybe some ol'-time pal,  An' you discussed bellhoppin' F'om Manhattan to Palm Beach, W'en some game beli boy did sugges' A gin-mill dat's in reach,  Whar you kin call a waiter An' ordah up rite swell, An' be served de same drinks You served gues's at de hotel  Den you is feelin' drowsy, Reaches home all broken down F'om de rev'lry o' de night befo' An' yo' ramblin' thru de town,  An' you cain't see yo' keyhole Fo' feelin' fo' de lock Den dis am what dem bell boys call  "Gittin' in de clock."  You reaches home 'bout five bells, W'en you'se due to wuk at six, An' all de fancy stuff you drinked Hab fo'med an' orful mix.  Li'l Sallie come to call you, De ol' man and mammy knock, But not er soun' comes f'om de room, Ez you is "in de clock."  Mandy! heah dat boy a sno'in'? 'Larm clock hit's done run away Lawdy! Telumphone de Cap'n Eph cain't do no wuk to-day."  "Oh, fo' some li'l cosy conah," Said "Sleepy Bull" to "Funny Jones," "I feels so orful, orful tiahed I'd lak to res' mah wairy bones."  "'Hongry,' doan fo'git to call me, An' w'en you call me, b'shuah an' knock-  I b'lieves I'll tek a li'l nap, Cause I'se almos' 'in de clock,'  "An' you kin tell de' Pure'n H'art,' Ef he wakes up befo'I do, Please sah, take a li'l ice water Up to room fo' two.  "Den tell de Watuh Boy fo' me, W'en he gits thru ca'in dat pail, To ax de Cap'n, please sah, To sign him to ca'y mah mail."  " Gib mah riga'ds to 'Short Hose,' Who's a bell boy so nicknamed On account ob his small stature, An' one dat's evah famed  "Fo' tellin' dreams, an' mekin' time, An' writin' verse an' song, But who could railly go to sleep An' still walk right uhlong  "So dis funny li'l espreshun, What you heah dem bell boys say W'en dey's been out de night befo', An' feels sleepy all naix day.  "An' dey keeps on gittin' drowsy, An' dere heads dey bump an ' knock, Den dis hyar am what dem bell boys call 'Gittin ' in de clock.'"
__label__political Once there lived three common people In a log hut with no steeple    A colored man, his wife and little girl; The mother first departed, And she left them broken hearted,    While their brains were reeling in a dizzy whirl.  And next old Father Totten, Whose hair was white as cotton,    And who had served for three score years a slave, Went away and left Lucinda And may the gods defend her,    While her father lies a-sleeping in his grave.  So those humble old-time people, Whose hut was void of steeple,    Left "Cindy" there to labor and to moan: To plant the corn and cotton Near the log hut that was rotten,    Till she became a woman fully grown.  Her parents they had taught her To cook, and to bring the water    From nature's little spring beneath the hill: To labor late and early, With no trace of being surly,    And bring home sacks of white meal from the mill.  This girl who was not charming Gave all her time to farming,    And learned the art of how to sow and reap; Her faithfulness to duty Made up her loss of beauty,    And gained for her such friends as she could keep.  Lucinda did the ditching, She scrubbed -she did the stitching,    And had to drive the mules and haul the wood; And she was always ready, With patient hand and steady,    To help the folks in all the neighborhood.  It must not be forgotten That beside the corn and cotton    She had a score of beehives on a shelf. She sold the wax and honey, Which brought her lots of money    And added quite a good deal to her pelf.  It was this Lucinda Totten, Who hoed the corn and cotton,    While living in a log hut all alone, Who saved up every penny Till she acquired so many    She bought a little cottage of her own.  So now adieu, Miss Totten, You'll never be forgotten    By friends who have a knowledge of your fame; You'll be loved by many neighbors Who will always praise your labors    While the title of this song shall bear your name.
__label__political In queenly state she sits at the gateway of the South —    And lifts with conscious pride her stately head : Fair Atlanta feels her worth, and her children are elate,    As thro' her streets they go with happy tread. She has sons of many kinds, she has sons of many hues,    And she says she cares for all, but this we know, Tho' she exacts of each alike service, revenue, respect,    The blacks get of her favor but scant show! Yet the harder do they strive her good will and grace to win.    Keeping step with progress — forward without pause! Gaining knowledge, getting wealth, doing all things duly meet.    Hoping thus to gain Atlanta's prized applause. But alas! 'tis all in vain, for she hates with bitter hate    These poor blacks who aye remind her of her shames; Of her greed for wealth and power, of her base consuming lust:    Noble striving but the more her wrath inflames. Then to hide from honest eyes her blood-guiltiness and sin,    She most cunningly contrives a wicked plot — Subtly spoken a base word, then this cry against the blacks    Cleaves the night ! "Revenge! lynch, slaughter and spare not!" Three awful nights she reveled in a carnival of crime,    Three days or e'er the tension was relieved; When her thirst for blood was sated, the whole nation stood aghast.    Her cry of "Rape," no more the world deceived! Lamentations, bitter sobs, heart-wrung groans the soft winds bore    Thro' the streets where lay the victims of her rage; Helpless age and guiltless youth, innocence and trusting truth —    It had taken all, her fury to assuage. Dread Atlanta nevermore can the crimson stain erase,    Nor the foul blot wipe from off fair history's scroll ; This fell deed shall e'er arise, ghost-like from the mists of time    To confront and terrify her guilty soul!
__label__political It's a lonely little cabin In a lonely little lane, An de cabin is so shabby Dat it won't keep out de rain; But no mattah whar I trabbles, An' no mattah whar I roam, I kin see de smoke dat rises F'om my little cabin home.  'Cou'se, my cabin's down in Georgia, Whar de mo'nin' glories climb, An' about in all de tree tops Birds is singin' all de time, Whar de sugah-cane is sweetah Dan de honey in de comb An' dere's no place Nowhar bettah Dan my Georgy cabin home!  I kin see my Lucy standin,' Peepin th'oo de winder cracks, Watchin' rabbits in de front yard, Makin' all deir pooty tracks; Er I sees her in de kitchen, Makin' bread dat rise like foam, An' I wants to go, I tell you, To my Georgy cabin home!  But I's up hyar in dis prison, 'Cause I made some "moonshine" rye, An' I may not see my cabin Nevahmo' untell I die; Yet I's gwine to tell St. Peter In his pooty heabenly dome, Ef he'll be so please to let me Come back to my Georgia home. 
__label__political And we laid 'em slowly 'neath a nameless mound, As the Autumn leaves serenely were descending, And sad and silent there were gathered round The reft ones who with sorrowing were bending.  Not there from restless nights of fevered pain That proffer death as life's surcease from sorrow; But void of wrongs these cruelly were slain Amid their struggles for bread on the morrow.  Whatever your misfortune, theirs was worse, For they knew not its plotting, or their crime; But fell a holocaust to color's curse, While duty-bent they labored in their prime.  And they toiled duty-bent for this reward: "No quarters to those whom the State disowns;" The stars and stripes, that should them shield afford, Now pirate's emblem with its skull and bones.  Haughtily speak they of the murdered dead, Not deeming them worth more than passing mention; Yet Sampson's Temple on his captor's head 'Mid mocking thundered down an inattention.  God of our fathers through their darkest way, Thou who proud nations humblest in their might, Are these those gloomiest hours ere breaking day, Or gathering storms that usher in the night?  Thy will done, O Lord; and not too long Withhold us justice: on our darkened road Be Thou our light, else from long years of wrong We give way under life's augmenting load.  Calmly we laid them 'neath the dewy sod Where the Morn's waking clarion shall find them; In love for country, and faith in their God They filled the humble duties He assigned them. 
__label__political Upon the future life we build, As built the toilers of the Nile, Whose rude and ruthless tyrants willed That God's eternal sun should smile.  On monuments of dust and stone Which should defy the flight of Time, Beneath dumb hieroglyphics groan, The wonder of each age and clime!  And still they stand, in Winter's storms And vernal Summer's rays benign, Lifting on high grand, gloomy forms Round which eternity may twine!  The Pyramids! When did they rear Their sombre bulk to Time's stern gaze? Caust estimate the thought -the care The lives condemned---the flight of days---  That went to consecrate the pile Where Egypt's tyrants now repose, The sentient serpents of the Nile, At whose command the phantoms rose?  Each stons cemented with the gore, The tears and sweat of some poor slave! For each dead king the millions bore Into the gloomy vaults, his grave,  A thousand men, perchance, had bled, Had sacrificed their all in death, To guard the tyrant in his bed And watch for his returning breath!  Yes; on the Future Life we build, Rear crumbling monuments to fame, When Death's remorseless clasp has stilled The currents of the mortal frame!
__label__political DE snow am jes' a fallin', an it's gittin' mighty col',    Covah up your head tight, honey; De house am jes' a-shakin' lak he gittin' awfu ' ol',    Covah up your head tight, honey; De win' is jes' a-singin' in de ol' fiah-place, An' he's gwine 'roun' de conahs lak he's in a race, So yo' bettah quit a-blinkin' an' hide yo' face,    Covah up your head tight, honey.     De owl down in de jungle am a-keepin' mighty still,    Covah up your head tight, honey; De 'possum in de sycamore is 'bout to hab a chill,    Covah up your head tight, honey; De raccoon am a-ramblin' t'rough the lonely wood, I t'ink he'd fin ' some shelter if he only c'u'd, 'Cause I know dis storm not feelin' so very good,    Covah up your head tight, honey.  De goblin am a-runnin' fo' to fin' a place to stay,    Covah up your head tight, honey; De buggah bear is hidin' jes ' outside do do', An 'he's watchin' fo 'de bad dat lives hear, sho', But he ain't a-gwine to git him ifhe's bad no mo',    Covah up your head tight, honey.
__label__political You ask why Ise happy,  Jus' lack Ise gwine to fly; Well, whah's you been a-stayin'? Yoh membry sho ain't spry. Ain't you felt de 'lectric thrill Thu de air a-hummin'? The smell o' good things cookin'? De signs o' good times comin '?  Seed a 'possum tother day  Fresh from a 'simmon tree Good gracious man! take-take keer 'Fore sin gets de heels o ' me. Whah's ol' Tray 'n ' all de houn's? Dat 'possum sure is mine, Gwine to sary ' a warr'nt on him, Fore ol' Ephrim makes de fin'.  Gwine to fall upon his trail, An' chase 'im day an' night, Ontell he is in dis bag, All shet up safe an' tight. G'way, darky! staihin' at me! D'want no pardner in dis deal, Case when I cotch dat 'possum He'll make my Christmas meal.  You'se jus' wantin' to be 'roun', I reads you thu' an' thu', Bout de time he's good an' brown To eat up ha'f my stew. Well, I spec's you can come— Bring Marfy, too-an' say! Don't fuhgit a jimmyjohn You know, hits Christmas day.
__label__political SOME folks lake de dew ob Summer, Some folks lake de ba'm ob Spring, Odders hankers fer ole Autumn, But I laks what Winter bring. Winter eb'nins long an ' chllly, No'f win' knockin ' at yo ' do',  Sit an' hear de voice ob Nachur Tell de embers die down low.  ONE thing why I laks de Winter, Ain' much work a doin' den, Coffee roas'in in de skillet, Hog a fatt'nin ' in de pen. Rindy cooks de ole time cookin', T'ank de Lor ' I got her sho; Eb'ry night I praise de Fadder As de embers die down low.  TALK an' talk from dark tell midnight, TANuffin' 'tall ter call yer min'— Smoke house full,-corn an ' bacon,— 'Tater pumps all in a line. Winter eb'nings bring sweet mem'ries Ob de days so long ago, When I sat and talked wid Rindy Tell de embers died down low.  SOM'IN 'bout de Winter weatha' Meks yo' feel yo' aint so spry, Draws yo' nearer to de Fadder 'Cause yo' time hit mought be nigh. Yo' doan see no green leab's peepin,' Yo' doan hear de waters flow,- Curious thoughts dey come upon me When de embers die down low.  SOMETIMES I sees de Lan o' Beulah Shinin' fore dese dim ole eyes, For de time aint long, I feels it, 'Fore my soul am gwine ter rise To de lan' ob milk an' honey Where de Crystal Ribber flow,--- An' der wont be no mo' waitin ' Tell de embers die down low.
__label__political The winter winds are blowing, Soldiers true, soldiers true, And the angry sea is flowing Soldiers true; They are telling of your pride; There is naught for you to hide, For the right is on your side, Soldiers true!  The stars are shining brightly, Soldiers true, soldiers true, They are dancing rather sprightly, Soldiers true; And they say you are not to blame If you did not know the name, And they love you just the same, Soldiers true!  The moonbeams now are dancing, Soldiers true, soldiers true, They are darting and a-glancing, Soldiers true; They are watching now to see What your final fate will be, When the truth gains potency,— Soldiers true!  I hear dry leaves rushing, Soldiers true, soldiers true, And the winds again are rushing, Soldiers true; They know you've done no wrong And they sing a joyous song, And they sing it loud and long,— Soldiers true!  If you've done no sinful deed, Soldiers true, soldiers true, To grieve, you have no need, Soldiers true; So you must not hide your face, Although you've lost your place, You are not in deep disgrace, Soldiers true.  The "Christmas Bells " are ringing, Soldiers true, soldiers true, And the angels softly singing, Soldiers true; They seem to call your name, Saying "Isn't it a shame, That all should bear the blame," Soldiers true.  The clouds are drifting high, Soldiers true, soldiers true, They seem to touch the sky, Soldiers true; And they tell it o'er and o'er That you will go back once more To the place you had of yore, Soldiers true.  God's great Flag of Truth is flying, Soldiers true, soldiers true, High above the white man's lying, Soldiers true. Lift your eyes and see it there, Waving in the upper air; Up and throw away despair,-- Soldiers true! 
__label__political Ye who would stop the progress of a race, Give ear; that race would question thee.  So base a deed as thine belies the name of man. This bickering that comes 'twixt clan and clan, Let Justice rule and prejudice erase. Ye call us enemies of thine to-day, But when the cannon sounded far away Calling thy fathers to the battle's din, This enemy upon thy threshold lay The watch dog, lest a foe should enter in. A friend or foe was he to thee and thine? This upward movement of a mighty host Is ever onward still. Like Banquo's ghost  They will not down, whatever you design To bruise and crush it with thy tyrant heel. The day is past when we knew but to kneel. Lost is thy purpose, as the wild bird's cry Within a storm. Its shriek is never heard Above the mutterings of the thunder's roar, Though Truth and Right upon the altar lie To see them cricified our hearts are stirred This sacrifice but makes Ambition soar To loftier heights, and we commit our plan To Him who better knows each struggling clan, To Him who rightly judges man and man.  
__label__political What made the pale-faced father frown And drive the girl away, When she had come in childish glee With his own sweet girl to play?  "Oh, papa, dear; do let her stay!" His little daughter cried. "Ah, no, my child!" the father said, And quickly turned aside.  What made the father say in scorn, With a look that seemed so wild, "That Thing's not fit to play with you, My darling little child?"  'Twas only the color of her skin That brought forth the father's scorn: 'Twas only because God made her black The day when she was born.  O, Father of Heaven and of Love, Will the angels say, "Go back?" Will they drive her away from the golden gate Because forsooth she's black? 
__label__political Not why a few black men in bondage sold, Did multiply like Israel did of old,    When pressed by lash and toil; Nor why their children, who are slaves no more, By prejudice are bound in bondage sore    And ground down to the soil;  Not Why, O Lord, But Help Not why Thy will didst carve in ebony Thy same great Image blessed by Trinity,    As Thou in marble white; Nor why man's will by laws and creeds decree The lowest grade our blest estate to be;    His mandates, our delight;  Not why one father's children are close kin; Nor why the fruitage of a father's sin    Set children's teeth on edge; Nor why God given rights of Liberty For sons of Ham an awful curse should be,    But Japheth's privilege;  Not why, O Lord, we do not ask Thee why; We humbly seek thy aid or else we die.    Not why, O Lord, but help. The surging tide of prejudice is strong And sweeps our stanchest earthly friends along.    Not why, O Lord, but help.  O'erhead the inky clouds obscure the sun, And angry winds doth drive the tempest on,    And heavy runs the sea; O Christ! if we but scan the troubled sea, We sink as Peter did in Galilee:    O bid us come to Thee!  Speak Thou unto the turbid waves of strife, Wrath-crowned and swift to stifle out our life;    O bid the sea be still! Bid Thou the winds to rein their chargers in And cease their raids which aid the cause of sin;    O bid them do Thy will!  All power is Thine in Heaven and Earth; The wrath and might of men is but Thy mirth,    For Thou hast made them all. Therefore we trust not human help nor creeds, We humbly seek the mighty power that heeds    The smallest sparrow's fall.  Not why, O Lord, we would not ask of Thee For Thou who bared Thine arm to make us free    Wilt not Thine own forsake; But help, we plead, O Lord and that Thy might Wilt lead us through this wilderness and night    And cause our day to break. 
__label__political Perhaps his skin is wholly black, But does that truly show That the man's soul beneath the skin Is not as white as snow?  Perhaps the skin is purely white, But can that truly mean That always beneath the whitened skin, The soul is pure and clean?  No, 'tis not the skin true manhood shows, Nor brings the soul to view; But our conduct toward our fellow marks The soul as false or true! 
__label__political WE hear of divers sayings, Read proverbs full of truth; To greatest age we hear them, From adolescent youth.  But that which shames all knowledge, And Reason doth impeach, Is this: "The white man's burden," Which o'er the world they preach.  Boasting of Christian goodness, Of Law and Equity, They fail to live their learning Of Moral probity.  From glutted town and province Where fortunes are denied, They sail the wide, wide ocean, Till they our shores have spied.  Thither they head: and landing With strange timidity, Receive our native kindness And hospitality.  Returning with the presents Of gold and priceless They call our lands benighted, And would their depths explore.  Our lands of dual greatness, Fertility and gold;— They confiscate and claim them With lying tongues so bold.  Their doctrines then, they teach us, Which eager we imbibe; But find them inconsistent, And shameful to our tribe.  They rob our gold and diamonds, With arms' defying power; And to our greatest sorrow, Our virgins they deflower.  And this, "the white man's burden!" To plunder, kill, deflower! Lay waste our Native glory, And falsely it endower!  Is this the heavy "burden" Throughout the world we hear? Aye! this the boasted "burden" Theft, Falsehood, Arms, and Fear!  Such arrant blatant boastings Contaminate our ear; Such arrant blatant boastings We hear from year to year!  And yet we hear them calmly, Resigning all our fate, To that great Power and Spirit, Who Times and men placate.  Ye sons of Ethiopia, Less boastful nations, all-- Courage! for soon such "greatness" Will totter, reel, and fall.  Ye Presidents and Princes, Who guide the stately helms, Kings of great tribes and peoples, Throughout the world -wide realms,  Behold the rank injustice To Ethiop's ebon sons; The lash, the whip, the wailings, The very blood that runs!  And this, "the white man's burden!"-- To plunder, kill, deflower! Lay waste our Native glory, And falsely it endower. 
__label__political Here on this festal day Our hearts are light and free, The clouds have rolled away, And shines fair liberty.  CHORUS.  Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah for the flag, The bonny, bonny blue! Hurrah! Hurrah! for the flag! Through which the bullets flew!  All praise to Thee, O God, All praise to Thee who broke The fetters and the rod Of slavery's galling yoke. CHORUS  All honor to the true, The men who fought and died, The boys who wore the blue Their country's love and pride. CHORUS  We honor, too, the men Who steered the ship of State, They gave their tongue and pen To stay the hand of fate.  The women too must share The glory of this day It is their answered prayer,  The clouds are rolled away. СHORUS. 
__label__political "God wills us free; man wills us slaves. I will as God wills; God's will be done. Here lies the body of John Jack, A native of Africa who died March, 1773, aged about sixty years. Though born in a land of slavery, He was born free. Though he lived in a land of liberty, He lived a slave; Till by his honest though stolen labour, He acquired the source of slavery, Which gave him his freedom; Though not long before Death, the great tyrant, Gave him his final emancipation, And put him on a footing with kings. Though a slave to vice, He practised those virtues Without which kings are but slaves." 
__label__political Shakespeare wuz a poet, Dat had a pop'lar name, I recken eberybody Hab heard ob his great fame.  He useter talk 'bout honor An 'writ erbout hit's worth, Said a good name wuz better Dan enyting on earth.  Said houses, lands, an' all sich t'ings Yas! I t'ink he took in cash,— W'an't de objec' ob dis life, He simply called 'em trash.  He eben went far 'nuff ter say. An ' bout hit he wuz sho', By takin' al' his wealth fum him Yer couldn't make 'im po.'  "De precious jewel uv my sol' Am ma name "he useter squall, "An' him dat steals dat 'way fum me Hab robbed me uv my all."  I hate ter spute dat gent'mun, Er call to him to halt Hits mighty strange fer me ter be Wid him a findin' fault.  But ef he wuz libin' now An' seen t'ings mov' erlong, An' seen des what's a-gwine on, He'd sing ernudder song.  Dat t'ing is dun been turned eroun', De name am now de trash, An' ter make one po' in dis good day You're got ter steal his cash. 
__label__political I have named you Malaguéna,    Malaguéna, Malaguéna Though your eyes have never burned me, Nor your lips have spake, and turned me    In a whirl of mad delight. But the many stars that whisper    In the night, And the vagrant winds that lisper    Through the day In the music of my dreams have learned to play    Malaguéna, Malaguéna--  All things name you, Malaguéna,    Malaguena, Malaguéna Birds that sing in rangeless rapture, And the glory that we capture    From the coronated rose: All the passion in the ocean's    Ebbs and flows; Ah, they fill me with emotions    Hot as flame When I seek you in the shadow of a name,    Malaguéna, Malaguéna!  When I meet you, Malaguéna,    Malaguéna, Malaguéna Shall we stop and gaze in wonder? Nav, like winds that meet in thunder    We will close in tight embrace, And my kisses flash like lightning    On your face; Then our souls will feel the tightning    Each to each, Till remoulded into one they break in speech,    Malaguéna, Malaguéna! 
__label__political Her face was a fair olive hue; Eyes like a tropic night when dew Makes the air heavy to the sea's rim; Figure like a willow, subtle, slim, That had the grace of a young queen; Hair, as the Empress Josephine Fashioned, when Paris bowed to her --La Belle de Demerara.  I see it all as in a dream Georgetown's seawall, where the stream Of Quality flows; among them moves She, whom the city's pride approves, What beauty gave and virtue crowned When music charmed their lips to sound This name their hearts bestowed on her, --La Belle de Demerara.  Sir Francis Hincks, at Government House On a gala night before her bows; Out from England on duty sent The Colonel of the regiment Glides with her in the stately dance; And in her soft vivacious glance Chief-Justice Beaumont bends to her  --La Belle de Demerara.  O Poet who sang of Dorothy Q., I have a great-grandmother too; Born in a British colonial place, Sent to learn Parisian grace; Who won all hearts in her demesne By the far deep blue Carribbean And large is the debt I owe to her, --La Belle de Demerara. 
__label__political "Follow me, follow me, Follow me downward! On through Lethean vale, Where'll come no Moslem's trail, Where'll cease all earthly wail, Follow me downward!  "Sisters, this choice is yours; Turn back to your own doors, Outraged by fiendish Moors, Virtue discounting; Or earthly life eschew, Celestial life in view, To thine own selves be true Heavenward mounting!  "What anguish have we borne! Sons, husbands from us torn, Now desolate and forlorn, Why hope for better? Soon death can end our woe In yon deep gulch below; Then peace to us will flow, Broken the fetter.  "See! Cello Bey is near; His warlike host I hear, With trumpets loud and clear, Marching for slaughter. They come in savage hordes, With gleaming spears and swords, List! These their cruel words: 'Kill every daughter!'  "Not to Mohammed we Bend low with suppliant knee, But to the Deity God, Saviour, Spirit. Him we shall e'er adore; And Him we now implore That when our days are o'er Heaven we'll inherit.  "Let us repeat the cry; Let us for freedom die, While all the saints reply; 'Islam must perish.' May the glorious cross be seen By Abdul -Hamid e'en As by Great Constantine This hope we cherish.  "With unabated breath, Leap, though awaits us death; For that foul craven saith We must be taken. Then on with hastening feet, Make our escape complete, Knowing that Christ we'll greet When we awaken!"  Then held they high in air Their children. To the care Of Him who heareth prayer Commended their spirit; And with unabated breath, Down to the gulch beneath, Down, down they plunged to death, Heaven to inherit.  Oh, ye angels of the sky, Bear the blessed news on high, For the right they dared to die Give them swift pinions! Tell their noble deed in song To the great and blood-washed throng All the heavenly hosts among Crown the Armenians! 
__label__political I am the Smoke King I am black! I am swinging in the sky, I am wringing worlds awry; I am the thought of the throbbing mills, I am the soul of the soul-toil kills, Wraith of the ripple of trading rills; Up I’m curling from the sod, I am whirling home to God; I am the Smoke King I am black.  I am the Smoke King, I am black! I am wreathing broken hearts, I am sheathing love’s light darts; Inspiration of iron times Wedding the toil of toiling climes, Shedding the blood of bloodless crimes— Lurid lowering ’mid the blue, Torrid towering toward the true, I am the Smoke King, I am black.  I am the Smoke King, I am black! I am darkening with song, I am hearkening to wrong! I will be black as blackness can— The blacker the mantle, the mightier the man! For blackness was ancient ere whiteness began. I am daubing God in night, I am swabbing Hell in white: I am the Smoke King I am black.  I am the Smoke King I am black! I am cursing ruddy morn, I am hearsing hearts unborn: Souls unto me are as stars in a night, I whiten my black men—I blacken my white! What’s the hue of a hide to a man in his might? Hail! great, gritty, grimy hands— Sweet Christ, pity toiling lands! I am the Smoke King I am black. 
__label__political Wife, I's been down to de city, An' I's come back home to stay, Whar de sunshine loves to lingah And de robins sing all day. I's done seen de crowds o' people, Jes' a-runnin' to an' fro, Lak day all done los' day senses An' was gwine to hunt fo' mo.'  I stood roun' f'om mo'n tell sunset, An' nobody shook my han', An' d'ain't a soul said "Hello!" 'Cause day's jes' so rich an' gran'; An' amid dat th'ong an ' bustle, Up an' down de Broadway street, I'se gwine tell you I prayed manful ' Jes' a few home-folks to meet!  An' at night it wa'n't no bettah, 'Neaf de mighty 'lectric lights  W'v, de crowds day got heap biggah, An' I nevah seen sich sights! But I t'ought o' othah evenin's, 'Neaf de quiet, res'ful moon, An' I kep' on sayin' easy, "Wife, I sho' gwine come back soon."  An' so hyar I is, Malindy, An' I's feelin' mighty fine, Jes' to git back to de country, An' dis little wife o' mine. Whar de sunshine loves to lingah An' de robins sing all day! An' I tell you now, Malindy, Dat's I's come back home to stay. 
__label__political A dandy looking drummer    While in a Southern town Was accosted by a bootblack    Of complexion dusky brown; Whose crownless hat and patches    Was a puzzle to behold, And how they stayed upon him    Is a mystery untold.  Said the bootblack, "Have er shine, Boss?    Only cost a haf a dime, And your shoes will take your picture    In about three minutes' time." Soon the bargain was completed    And quite soon the work was done, Then the drummer with the bootblack    Thought to have a bit of fun.  Said he, "Jake, I cannot pay you    For my purse I've failed to bring. How'd you like to take in payment   This expensive diamond ring?" Then with weird and comic gestures,    With intense affected pride, And with sparkling eyes triumphant   Jake in cunning tones replied:  "Go' long, Boss, an' quit yer foolin,'    Aain't gwi' do no sich a thing, 'Cause de police sho to 'rest me     Ef dev ketch me wid dat ring. 'Cause dey sho gwi' say I stoled it    Jes to take somewhere to sell. Dev kin see I didn't buy it     Rags an' diamonds don't match well."  "No! no! Boss, jes keep dat diamond    Fer hard luck some other time; All I axes ub you, mistah,    Gib ter me ma haf a dime. 
__label__political Come, boys! there's a call to arms.  Our country needs our and  Don't think of home and loved ones,  Come, fall in the grade   You know the fathers of this land  Who died that she be free  Are looking for us to uphold  The flag of Liberty   And so they did etch noble black  Went forth to face the foe,  Whose heart was light for country's cause  While home was desolate with woe   Loved ones praved to God above.  To spite them with His might.  That they return with honor  To their home and land of right  And God did spare that noble band  To return to home and friends.  They are an honor to their race  They stand like noble men.   Back to regular duty,  Stationed here and there,  Though in the service of Uncle Sam  Not welcomed anywhere.   What means this feeling of hatred?  Are we not one of this country’s sons? Have we not done our duty,  Each and every one?   Well, we'll not complain, comrades,  Our forefathers suffered before:  We'll do our duty like soldiers  As they did in days of yore.  But remember there's a bitter feeling That is moving through the land And no matter whatever happens We will stand un man for me.  From Washington came the order To the 25th Infantry renowned You will move with the battalion And  be stationed at Fort Brown  It was on the night of the 12th [Illegible]  While de tending then iives of Brownsville [Illegible] [Illegible stanza]  The shooting, then became general,  Each man's life was in his hands;  On the [date] of August, at Brownsville,  Came a sorrow o'er this land.  Then came the investigation  Ordered by the Commander-in-Chief,  To bring to a Southern bar for trial.  To add more to their grief   “Now tell who did the shooting  And how it all begun;"  But not one word escaped their lips That noble band stood mum.   Well, if you will shield the guilty  Your fame as soldiers is erased:  You are discharged, every man of you,  Dishonored and disgraced.  Ah but who can say dishonor . In the land of toil and strife, When men stand by their comrades For the protection of their life.  In justice to their comrades, In justice to their home, We'll await that final tribunal When God sits on His throne.  All hail the power of Jesus's name, Let angels prostrate fall: Bring forth the royal diadem And crown Him Lord of all."
__label__political When shall my hand and heart be free To try the far off heights of Fame, On her fair page to write my name And shine till Time shall cease to be?  When shall my soul take wings and mount To that proud shrine where Glory stands, And beckons me with willing hands, To come and lave me at her fount?  I cannot gain the means to rise, Denied am I the right to soar, Because I'm black, because I'm poor Would men their fellowman despise?  And yet There is my natural bent, I have the gift in endles flow, I have the will to make it glow, But cruel Fate will not consent.  And so I move as doth a ball, Upon the bosom of the tide, Unable its own course to guide, Obeys the ever -breaking squall.  But lest my years for naught be spent In drifting aimless o'er the tide, I'll wrest the rudder of my pride And steer Life's barque to where 'tis bent. 
__label__political There's a Sampson lying, sleeping in the land,  He shall soon awake, and with avenging hand,  In an all unlocked for hour,  He will rise in mighty power;  What dastard can his righteous rage withstand?   E'er since the chains were riven at a stroke,  E'er since the dawn of Freedom's morning broke,  He has groaned, but scarcely uttered,  While his patient tongue ne'r muttered,  Though in agony he bore the galling yoke.   O, what cruelty and torture has he felt?  Could his tears, the heart of his oppressor melt?  In his gore they bathed their hands,  Organized and lawless bands-—  And the innocent was left in blood to welt.   The mighty God of Nations doth not sleep,  His piercing eye its faithful watch doth keep,  And well nigh His mercy's spent,  To the ungodly lent:  "They have sowed the wind, the whirlwind they shall reap."   From His nostrils issues now the angry smoke,  And asunder bursts the all-oppressive yoke;  When the prejudicial heel  Shall be lifted, we shall feel,  That the hellish spell surrounding us is broke.   The mills are grinding slowly, slowly on,  And till the very chaff itself is gone;  Our cries for justice louder,  'Till oppression's ground to powder —  God speed the day of retribution on!   Fair Columbia's filmy garments all are stained;  In her courts is blinded justice rudely chained;  The black Sampson is awaking,  And his fetters fiercely breaking;  By his mighty arm his rights shall be obtained.  
__label__political OH colored girl of thee I sing! Thy virtue like the sun and dew Distill the sweets which to thee cling; Tho ' of dark race yet all the world, Shall praises great to thee long bring.  Altho ' oppressed oh, dark race girl, Be proud of thy high destiny , With wisdom clear thy flag unfurl; And with increasing lustre shine; Thy fame around the nations curl .  From depths of great obscurity Thou comest clothed with beauty rare, And good sense linked with purity, Which takes us far on life's rough road , Where joins with womanhood duty.  None lauds thy name; few duty moves To plead to cause; who honors thee Sweet maid? Alas! it now behooves Us hang our heads, because we have Not done the things which duty proves.  Oppressed were Jews, in olden days, When Pharoahs ruled; but since have come Their Hannahs, Marys, their bright rays Awaken Jewish men, gave them A higher aim in many ways.  Can go we neither up nor down, Where equal rignts are hard to find, Or wear with fame or shame a crown, Unless each step we have thee near, With lovely smile or ugly frown.  Filled with the spirit of the sage, With wisdom bathe our dauntless souls, And with a knowledge of the age, Remove the wrongs which clog our way And which to-day so strong engage.
__label__political If I were a bird, a sweet song -bird Which, far away, some tale had heard Of aching hearts and lives grown sad, Of souls which comfort never had, I'd come and haunt their dismal way And gaily sing my sweetest lay, To draw their cheerless hearts away    From sorrow and from sighing.  If I were a stream, a lovely stream, Winding amid some perfect dream Of woodland beauty,and had learned How travelers thirst and poets yearned, I'd call the thirsty ones to drink; Bid poet, while I sing, to think And hope I'd draw them from the brink    Of blank discouragement.  If I were a star, a distant star, Shining in beauty from afar O'er desert waste,on tangled wood Where some poor soul in darkness stood, I'd concentrate my rays of light Upon his path of deepest night To light him in his way aright    From groping, stumbling, falling.  If I were an angel, angel fair, Speeding God's message (far and near O'er land and sea where'er man dwell) Of love and life through Christ, I'd tell That message in my sweetest tone; Would teach -- plead that men might own Their sin, repent, and at God's throne    Redemption seek from dying.  But now that I am amortal man, Created by God's holy hand Like angel, star, like bird, like stream, Which each doth do its task and seem Content - since God in Providence Hath made me this, Omnipotence Rules all supreme,and Iam still,    Silenced by His own holy will:  For I must be more fit by far To be a man than stream or star, Than bird or angel,more or less; I'll cheer and charm and light and bless, I'll fructify just as I am, Make use the powers God gave to man, And do e'en more than angels can, Content with my own calling. 
__label__political Lead wisely on, thou God-appointed guide, And save thy people from corroding pride; In thy right hand their lingering hopes reside,    Lead careful on!  With confidence they cleave thy shielded side,    And follow on!  Thou who dost come to lead a bonded tribe, Dost lead with nimble speed and tak'st no bribe, Dost all the Heaven -born virtues strong imbibe, To move.it onTo thee my humble tribute I ascribe,    Pray, lead us on.  Thou, organizer of a shattered race, Eternal sunshine gilds thy godly face, We feel secure within thy firm embrace, While marching on; Thy name nor time nor memory shall erase,    Then lead us on!  Thou, benefactor to all human kind, Dost weave the cord the races all to bind, The God of Wisdom in thy head enshrined, Directs thee on;  Obeyest thou the Superhuman mind,     And leadest on. 	 Up from the yoke of slavery forced thy flight, Thou aimest ever for a greater light A Moses sent-no ill begotten night     To bear us on; Thy noble deep-grained principles unite,    And show us on.   Thou hast no time to rave at idle talk, For prudent counsel glads thy heavenly walk. And ever as astrong and prosperous bark    Thou plowest on,  With sober helm thou shootest for the mark,    Safe surging on.  Were I of keenly wit and vision bright, And could but only wield my pen aright, I'd paint the glory of the magic light,    That guides us on,  That from the deepest depths of darkest night    Directs us on.  Ye fools, who disapprove his plan today, Who now attempt to check its giant sway, Just be content to watch and see the way    He leads us on;  Immortal love his labours will repay    To lead us on.  Some day when all your gory tears are past, When nevermore you feel oppression's blast, You will rejoice to find that he at last,    Has led us on,  When at the goal of peace we anchor fast,    All clinging on.  Hail Washington! all hail, all hail to thee, The wise and loving head of Tuskegee, Who wields the parent rod of Industry    To lead us on.  Thou who would'st shape anation's destiny,     Still lead us on.
__label__political Out of the darkness Out of the night, Up from slavery Into the light, Pushing straight -forward, Using his time Fighting ignorance, Defeating crime, Climbing steadily To moral heights. O Negro haters, Why curse and fight, He loves the Dear Flag, Red, White and Blue. In peace and in war He is always true. So treat him squarely, Help him to rise, A better country Will be the prize. 
__label__political Alas, in those times, 'tis true in all climes, in spite of the lark that sings, Man goeth apace in a mad wild race, and lays down his life for Things! If we search far and wide, on every side, the end kept in view is the same: Man counts for naught where the battles are fought, and Things in the end of the game.  For butter and bread, with hurrying tread, man goeth forth to the fray: And when more and more his larder runs o'er, he thinks he has won the day. Man bold that their strength throughout the world's length is houses and money and landa s for their souls, And so for their souls, from equator to poles, they lift not the weight of their hands.   Though Giver of All, who markest the fall of the sparrows that downward come. Who [illegible] our way by night and by day, of truth and of goodness the sum Grant we may learn man's greed to spurn and know thine age-old plan That Things is not the end of man's lot, but the end of Things is man.  Grant we [illegible] onward we go, and [illegible] sun flies fast from the [illegible] That we should be spurred by every word which proceedeth out of Thy mouth. Not alone for the sake of bread and of cake, grant that Thy children may strive.  But oh! [illegible] the song of the lark all day long, may our souls be keenly alive! 
__label__political Dere's times on life's mountin' clim'in,    W'en my han's gits bleedin' so Dat I gits disgusted tryin',    An' say, " Gwine ter clim' no mo'l" Den I 'gine ter think 'ow many    Hights great men reached and kep', Dat was not gain'd thru foolin ',    But toilin' w'ile udders slep'. Den I clim' on wid fresh courage,    An' de tho'ts ter nevah stop, (Tho my feet be so' an' bleedin') ) Clingin' on sharp edge fragments,    'Til I gains de mountain top. Dere's times daylight goes stealing    Wid de sun away fom me; Den de night grows dark an' foggy;    Der's no stars dat I kin see. But I 'spec' ter keep on clim'in',    Fer I 'no' dere is er crown On de mountain top er waitin'    W'en I lays my burden down. An' up dere 'tis blessed sunshinel    An' rubies an' silver an' gol', An' fer him who en's de journey    A crown uv vict'ry untol'! 
__label__political Let us be patient; we can wait still longer,    Firm in the faith That the great Power above is vastly stronger    Than aught beneath. We know the strength in men which God doth nourish    No other can defy: That every mortal sin that here doth flourish    Is mortal and must die. But in that faith is wrapped our high endeavor,    And with a valiant heart We must close up the broken ranks and never    Fall in our part. We know that hate and every evil passion    Must bide its time; That the eternal beauties God doth fashion    Must be sublime.  Then with [illegible] fervor let us labor,     Still [illegible] our bloodless war, Keeping our spirit toward our erring neighbor    Sweet to the core. And each unselfish efort now expanded.    How great soe'er the cost. In the grand structure, when the work is ended    Will not he lost. 
__label__political The brooding Autumn days are here. And no, also, the Tree of Tears —  Through acuna conic of Hummers drear From verdant springs' dead hopes and fears.  They Journey to the Winter snow, The white throuds of the sleeping Spring. And moving in a circle, go A life in life in everything.  The Autumn leaves which fall to earth, tipon their mother's faithful breast,  Will come ngain in other birth  From Winter's long and rigid test:--  Yes, they will come from dry and wet. In fruits of garden, grain of feld, And blowing of rose and violet. A beauteous and a bounteous yield.  Oh, Tree of Tears! You naked, bare, Stand firmly in the Autumn earth.--  The [illegible] to have the Maker's care. The Serpent, you! of Man's first birth.  You Answer to the Master's call. And, seasons four, that come and go, Autumn, the saddest of them all,- The children of your Eden's woe. 
__label__political Nine million and a half Traveling in a world of gloom, And behind the cradle stands That rocket them, in oppression's tomb.  Nothing to guide; no path or mark, Yet the race is marching fast, Like brave pilgrims in the dark, Forgetting trials of the past.  They are called a foolish people  For struggling in a fertile wrath, The way is often disagreeable, But they keep the upward path. Thorny is the road they travel [illegible] To reach the stars that shine above.  They'll never live like kings On what is not theire own; Out of confusion they will bring Great blessings justly won.  Tho' the race is much divided  By the Devils, shot and shell, But they soon will not be guided By those who ring destruction's bell. 
__label__political The Teacher  LORD, who am I to teach the way To little children day by day, So prone myself to go astray ?  I teach them knowledge, but I know How faint they flicker and how low The candles of my knowledge glow.  I teach them power to will and do, But only now to learn anew My own great weakness through and through .  I teach them love for all mankind And all God's ceatures, but I find My love comes lagging far behind.  Lord, if their guide I still must be, Oh let the little children see The teacher leaning hard on Thee. 
__label__political [Written for The Crisis and dedicated to His Excellency, the Governor of South Carolina.]  Once looked I into hell--'twas in a trance Throughout a horrid night of soul-wrought pain; Down through the pit I saw the burning plain, Where writhed tortured swarm without one glance Upward to earth or God. There in advance  Of all the rest was one with lips profane And murderous, bloody hands, marked to be slain by peers that would not bear him countance. 'God,' cried I in my dream, 'what soul is he Doomed thus to drain the utmost cup of fate, That even the cursed of Tartarus expel?' And the great Voice replied: 'The chastity Of dear, confiding Law he raped; now Hate, His own begotten, drives him forth from hell."
__label__political A certain element in the South takes pains to rear the children of the family faithfully in the doctrines of Blease and Vardaman. 'A Negro had been lynched in the neighborhood,' said a recently returned traveler, 'and crowds went out to see what was left of his body. The people I was staying with went with the rest and took their children--all but one, who had been naughty and was kept home as a punishment.'  I met a little blue-eyed girl-- She said she was five years old; 'Your locket is very pretty dear; And pray what may it hold?' And then--my heart grew chill and sick-- The gay child did not flinch-- 'I found it--the tooth of a colored man-- My father helped to lynch.' 'And what had he done, my fair-haired child?' (Life and Death play a fearful game!) 'Oh, he did nothing--they made a mistake-- But they had their fun, just the same!' 
__label__political I am a Negro, but I sing and sing,    Burning with kiss divine that made me so.    O brother mortal, likest to the snow, Turn not in coldness from the song I bring, But listen to my lyre's low murmuring,    Where down the cypresses I sadly go,    Through deepening twilight, lest the faint winds know The secret of some tender little thing That haunts and haunts me, and they tell it all--    All, all my sorrows and ambitious, too. For these 'oercome me; these, through dreamy fall,    Keep calling, calling; beckoning, as to you: 'Up! Sing the song! Men shall forget your race, Nor blush to keep the image of your face.'
__label__political Ever and ever and anon, After the black storm, the eternal, beautous bow! Brother, to rosy-painted mists that arch beyond, Blithely I go.  My brown men laurled and my lyre Twined with immortal ivy for one little rippling song; My “House of Golden Leaves” they praised and “passionate fire”-- But, friend, the way is long!  Onward and onward, up! away! Though Fear all his banners in my face, And my feet stumble, lo! The Orphean day! Forward by God’s grace!  These signs are still before me: “Fear” “Danger”, “Unprecedented” and I hear black “No” Still thundering and “Churl.” Good Friend, I rest me here– Then to the glittering bow!  Loometh and cometh Hate in wrath, Mailed Wrong, swart Servitutde and Shame, with bitter rue, Nathless a Negro poet’s feet must tread the path  The winged god knew.  Thus, my true Brother, dream-led, I Forefend the anathema, following the span. I hold my head as proudly high  As any man. 
__label__political To be a Negro in a day like this   Demands forgiveness. Bruised with blow on blow, Betrayed, like him whose woe dimmed eyes gave bliss   Still must one succor those who brought one low, To be a Negro in a day like this.  To be a Negro in a day like this   Demands rare patience--patience that can wait In utter darkness. 'Tis the path to miss,   And knock, unheeded, at an iron gate, To be a Negro in a day like this.  To be a Negro in a day like this   Demands strange loyalty. We serve a flag Which is to us white freedom's emphasis.   Ah! one must love when Truth and Justice lag, To be a Negro in a day like this.  To be a Negro in a day like this--   Alas! Lord God, what evil have we done? Still shines the gate, all gold and amethyst,   But I pass by, the glorious goal unwon, "Merely a Negro"--in a day like this! 
__label__political I am dead; Yet somehow, somewhere, In Time's weird contradiction, I  May tell of that dread deed, wherewith I brought to Children of the Moon  Freedom and vast salvation.  I was a woman born And trod that streaming street That ebbs and flows from Harlem's hills Thro' caves and canyons limned in light Down to the twisting sea.  That night of nights I stood alone and at the End Until the sudden highway to the Moon, Golden in splendor, Became too real to doubt.  Dimly I set foot upon the air; I fled, I flew, thro' thrills of light, With all about, above, below the whirring Of almighty wings. I found a twilight land Where, hardly hid, the sun Sent softly saddened rays of Red and brown to burn the iron earth And bathe the snow-white peaks In mighty splendor.  Black were the men, Hard haired and silent slow, Moving as shadows Bending with face of fear to earthward; And women there were none.  "Woman, woman, woman!" I cried in mounting terror. "Woman and Child!" And the cry sang back Thro' Heaven with the Whirring of almighty wings.  Wings, wings, endless wings, Heaven and earth are wings; Wings that flutter, furl and fold, Always folding and unfolding, Ever folding yet again; Wings, veiling some vast And veiled face, In blazing blackness, Behind the folding and unfolding, The rolling and unrolling of Almighty wings!  I saw the black men huddle Fumed in fear, falling face downward; Vainly I clutched and clawed, Dumbly they cringed and cowered, Moaning in mournful monotone:    O Freedom, O Freedom,    O Freedom over me;    Before I'll be a slave    I'll be buried in my grave    And go home to my God    And be free.  It was as angel music From the dead, And ever, as they sang, The winged Thing of wings, filling all Heaven, Folding and unfolding, and folding yet again, Tore out their blood and entrails 'Til I screamed in utter terror And a silence came: A silence and the wailing of a babe  Then at last I saw and shamed; I knew how these dumb dark and dusky things Had given blood and life To fend the caves of underground The great black caves of utter night Where earth lay full of mothers And their babes.  Little children sobbing in darkness. Little children crying in silent pain. Little mothers rocking and groping and struggling, Digging and delving and groveling Amid the dying-dead and dead-in-life. And drip and dripping of warm, wet blood Far, far beneath the wings. The folding and unfolding of almighty wings.  I bent with tears and pitying hands Above these dusky star-eyed children. Crinkly haired, with sweet-sad baby voices Pleading low for light and love and living— And I crooned:     Little children weeping there,    God shall find thy faces fair;    Guerdon for thy deep distress.    He shall send His tenderness;    For the tripping of thy feet    Make a mystic music sweet    In the darkness of thy hair;    Light and laughter in the air—    Little children weeping there.    God shall find thy faces fair!  I strode above the stricken bleeding men. The rampart 'ranged against the skies. And shouted: "Up I say, build and slay; Fight face foremost, force a way, Unloose, unfetter and unbind; Be men and free."  Dumbly they shrank Muttering they pointed toward that peak Than vastness vaster, Whereon a darkness brooded, "Who shall look and live," they sighed; And I sensed The folding and unfolding of almighty wings  Yet did we build of iron, bricks and blood; We built a day, a year, a thousand years. Blood was the mortar,blood and tears And, ah, the Thing, the Thing of wings, The winged folding wing of Things, Did furnish much mad mortar For that tower.  Slow and ever slower rose the towering task And with it rose the sun. Until at last on one wild day, Wind-whirled, cloud-swept and terrible. I stood beneath the burning shadow Of the peak. Beneath the whirring of almighty wings While downward from my feet Streamed the long line of dusky faces And the wail of little children sobbing under Earth.  "Freedom! " I cried. "Freedom! " cried Heaven, Earth and Stars, And a Voice near-far Amid the folding and unfolding of Almighty wings Answered "I am Freedom— Who sees my face is free— He and his."  I dared not look; Downward I glanced on deep bowed heads and closed eyes, Outward I gazed on flecked and flaming blue— But ever onward, upward flew The sobbing of small voices; Down, down, far down into the night.  Slowly I lifted livid limbs aloft; Upward I strove: The Face, the Face ; Onward I reeled: The Face, the Face! To Beauty wonderful as sudden death Or horror horrible as endless life— Up! Up! the blood-built way (Shadow grow vaster! Terror come faster!) Up ! Up to the blazing blackness Of one veiled face And endless folding and unfolding, Rolling and unrolling of Almighty wings: The last step stood! The last dim cry of pain Fluttered across the stars— And then—  Wings, wings, triumphant wings, Lifting and lowering, waxing and waning, Swinging and swaying, twirling and whirling, Whispering and screaming, streaming and gleaming, Spreading and sweeping and shading and flaming— Wings, wings, eternal wings, 'Til the hot red blood Flood fleeing flood, Thundered thro' Heaven and mine ears While all across a purple sky The last vast pinion Trembled to unfold.  I rose upon the Mountain of the Moon; I felt the blazing glory of the Sun. I heard the Song of Children crying "Free!" I saw the Face of Freedom— And I died. 
__label__political O brothers mine, to-day we stand       Where half a century sweeps our ken,     Since God, through Lincoln's ready hand,       Struck off our bonds and made us men.     Just fifty years--a winter's day--       As runs the history of a race;     Yet, as we look back o'er the way,       How distant seems our starting place!     Look farther back! Three centuries!       To where a naked, shivering score,     Snatched from their haunts across the seas,       Stood, wild-eyed, on Virginia's shore.     Far, far the way that we have trod,       From heathen kraals and jungle dens,     To freedmen, freemen, sons of God,       Americans and Citizens.     A part of His unknown design,       We've lived within a mighty age;     And we have helped to write a line       On history's most wondrous page.     A few black bondmen strewn along       The borders of our eastern coast,     Now grown a race, ten million strong,       An upward, onward marching host.     Then let us here erect a stone,       To mark the place, to mark the time;     A witness to God's mercies shown,       A pledge to hold this day sublime.     And let that stone an altar be,       Whereon thanksgivings we may lay,     Where we, in deep humility,       For faith and strength renewed may pray.     With open hearts ask from above       New zeal, new courage and new pow'rs,     That we may grow more worthy of       This country and this land of ours.     For never let the thought arise       That we are here on sufferance bare;     Outcasts, asylumed 'neath these skies,       And aliens without part or share.     This land is ours by right of birth,       This land is ours by right of toil;     We helped to turn its virgin earth,       Our sweat is in its fruitful soil.     Where once the tangled forest stood,--       Where flourished once rank weed and thorn,--     Behold the path-traced, peaceful wood,       The cotton white, the yellow corn.     To gain these fruits that have been earned,       To hold these fields that have been won,     Our arms have strained, our backs have burned,       Bent bare beneath a ruthless sun.     That Banner which is now the type       Of victory on field and flood--     Remember, its first crimson stripe       Was dyed by Attucks' willing blood.     And never yet has come the cry--       When that fair flag has been assailed--     For men to do, for men to die,       That have we faltered or have failed.     We've helped to bear it, rent and torn,       Through many a hot-breath'd battle breeze;     Held in our hands, it has been borne       And planted far across the seas.     And never yet--O haughty Land,       Let us, at least, for this be praised--     Has one black, treason-guided hand       Ever against that flag been raised.     Then should we speak but servile words,       Or shall we hang our heads in shame?     Stand back of new-come foreign hordes,       And fear our heritage to claim?     No! stand erect and without fear,       And for our foes let this suffice--     We've bought a rightful sonship here,       And we have more than paid the price.     And yet, my brothers, well I know       The tethered feet, the pinioned wings,     The spirit bowed beneath the blow,       The heart grown faint from wounds and stings;     The staggering force of brutish might,       That strikes and leaves us stunned and dazed;     The long, vain waiting through the night       To hear some voice for justice raised.     Full well I know the hour when hope       Sinks dead, and 'round us everywhere     Hangs stifling darkness, and we grope       With hands uplifted in despair.     Courage! Look out, beyond, and see       The far horizon's beckoning span!     Faith in your God-known destiny!       We are a part of some great plan.     Because the tongues of Garrison       And Phillips now are cold in death,     Think you their work can be undone?       Or quenched the fires lit by their breath?     Think you that John Brown's spirit stops?       That Lovejoy was but idly slain?     Or do you think those precious drops       From Lincoln's heart were shed in vain?     That for which millions prayed and sighed,       That for which tens of thousands fought,     For which so many freely died,       God cannot let it come to naught.
__label__political FATHER, FATHER ABRAHAM  (On the Anniversary of Lincoln's Birth)      Father, Father Abraham,       To-day look on us from above;     On us, the offspring of thy faith,       The children of thy Christ-like love.     For that which we have humbly wrought,       Give us to-day thy kindly smile;     Wherein we've failed or fallen short,       Bear with us, Father, yet awhile.     Father, Father Abraham,       To-day we lift our hearts to thee,     Filled with the thought of what great price       Was paid, that we might ransomed be.     To-day we consecrate ourselves       Anew in hand and heart and brain,     To send this judgment down the years:       The ransom was not paid in vain. 
__label__political What have I fathomed of life, What of its medley of strife, Sorrow and solace profound? What can we creatures of dust Stand upon, swear by and trust, What my unshakable ground? This: that though evil be strong, Goodness prevaileth ere long However betrayed or beset; That he his own spirit doth smother, Who willeth the hurt of another; And this : that God liveth yet.  
__label__political Dusky lashes droop and fall, Night-winds whisper, night-birds call. Close your tired sleepy eyes, Earth is singing lullabies, Kindly twilight shadows creep O’er a world that longs for sleep, Little dusky babe of mine Close those sleepy eyes of thine, Mother’s love will softly keep  Watch above you while you sleep, Cruel hate and deadly wrong Cannot silence mother’s song Though against thy soft brown cheek She may hide her face and weep. Sleep, brown baby, while you may Peacefully, at close of day. Oh, that mother’s love could guard, Keep thee safe ‘neath watch and ward From the cruelly deadly things  That await thee while she sings. Prejudice and cold white hate: These, my baby, these, thy fate, Little, gentle, trustful thing,  Thus, these sobs, the while I sing.  
__label__political Thou quiv’ring tongue of fire!     Bring to our land a Pentecost, The hearts of men inspire To gain once more the freedom they have lost. And fire with pristine courage sire and son, Burn on.  Thou flaring sheet of flame! Burn like a startling come of high, Forewarning in God’s name And writing truth on our deceptive sky Whose quiet aspect has another mien  Unseen. Thou whetted sword of truth! Thou brandished sword make tyrants shake, But stalwart men and youth From the oppressed are rising up to break The bonds of bondage and the bars of caste. At last. Thou freedoms clarion call! Wake the oppressed, ring in their ears, Call them to rally all As one, unite their strength, shake off their fears, And fight till freedom’s battles are won–  Call on! Thou mighty “still, small voice!” Speak on till thou art clearly heard! Let the oppressed rejoice And the oppressor tremble at thy word, Until the truth is known and justice is done Speak on! 
__label__political With brawny arms the negro stands, Uplifting in his sable hands  King Cotton; while about him grow The pretty buds as white as snow. His arms alone support, sustain, His royal person while he reigns, Exalt, ye nations that be prone, Him who thus stands beneath the throne For lo, what danger! what alarm! Should he withdraw his mighty arm. Pray, what if he should take away That pow’r which gives King Cotton sway O’er all the world; for by his right  He can withhold that which would be blight The nations all upon the globe. For though he may not wear the robe, Nor on the regal throne may sit, He is the king; though black quite fit; Despite illit’racy and birth, To wield the scepter o’er the earth. 
__label__political (Inspired by the Washington protest meeting)  Strong spirits must awaken! for the time, Unhealthy with a bitter sick unrest That ne'er relaxes in our fevered breast, Bids that we, Godlike, rise above the crime That sullies the still beauty of our time, That makes a noble state seem still unblest, Because her weaker brothers find no rest, But wearied, labor in a cause sublime. Come forth! ye deep-voices star-souled men, And o'er the sounding land raise high your song, Sing o'er and o'er the truth you love again, To tame the terror of this fearful wrong, Teach deep inwrought the power of love through all, That without which earth's glories all must fall.  
__label__political Keep me in chains! I defy you! That is a pow’r I deny you! I will sing! I will rise! Up! To the lurid skies- With the smoke of my soul, With my last breath, Tar-feathered, I shall cry: Ethiopia shall not die! And hand in hand with Death, Pass on! I shall not curse you. But singing– My singing! fatefully ringing Till startled and dumb  You falter, the sum  Of your crime shall reveal–  This do I prophesy… O Heart wrung dry! Awake! Startle the world with thy cry: Ethiopia shall not die!  The Crisis. March 1915 Re-typed by Christian Farrior
__label__political One does such work as one will not,   And well each knows the right; Though the white storm howls, or the sun is hot,   The black must serve the white. And it's, oh, for the white man's softening flesh,   While the black man's muscles grow! Well I know which grows the mightier,   I know; full well I know. The white man seeks the soft, fat place,   And he moves and he works by rule. Ingenious grows the humbler race   In Oppression's prodding school. And it's, oh, for a white man gone to seed,   While the Negro struggles so! And I know which race develops most,   I know; yes, well I know. The white man rides in a palace car,   And the Negro rides "Jim Crow." To damn the other with bolt and bar,   One creepeth so low; so low! And it's, oh, for a master's nose in the mire,   While the humbled hearts o'erflow! Well I know whose soul grows big at this,   And whose grows small; I know! The white man leases out his land,   And the Negro tills the same. One works; one loafs and takes command;   But I know who wins the game! And it's, oh, for the white man's shrinking soil,   As the black's rich acres grow! Well I know how the signs point out at last,   I know; ah, well I know! The white man votes for his color's sake,   While the black, for his is barred; (Though "ignorance" is the charge they make),   But the black man studies hard. And it's, oh, for the white man's sad neglect,   For the power of his light let go! So, I know which man must win at last,   I know! Ah, Friend, I know!
__label__political Armageddon  Written at the outbreak of the World War ,just after President Wilson's appeal to the country for a "poise of undisturbed judgment,” — to express the significance to the trammeled millions of colored people the world over, and especially to the American Negro, of that spirit of the times which well nigh destroyed civilization.  "Where is the wise? where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? . But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which arc despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence."— Paul.  "What is all this but a wild fermentation of the spirit, wherefrom, the fiercer it is, the clearer product will one day evolve itself."—Carlyle  BEFORE the whirlwind and the thunder shock, The agony of nations, and this wild Eruption of the passionate will of man, These tottering bastions of mighty states, This guillotine of culture, and this new Unspeakable Golgotha of the Christ, My heart declares her faith, and, undismayed, I write her prompting—write it in that poise Of judgment undisturbed to which our Head Admonishes the nation.                                  But have I A certain warrant? Does the cannon roar Above the mangled myriads washed in blood Upon a hundred fields embolden me To vent the doctrine of a private heart ! Nay, ask it not, for God hath chosen still The weak thing, and the foolish, and the base, And that which is despised to work His will; And humble men are chartered yet to run Upon His errands round the groaning sphere. Not many of the mighty shall be called, Not many that dispute, not many wise, That so the prophecy may be fulfilled. Among the least of men of many strains, Whose origin outdates the pyramids, Uncherished of my country — though the blood Of all my fathers ran to make her free Known by a name that typifies the slave, Synonymous with darkness, and by that Set in the ranks of mortals least esteemed, I claim no merit save the love of truth, And care to find for her a lodging- place. I have been bred and born beneath the stern Duress and cold inhospitality Of that environment which prejudice Fills consciously with bane; and I have sought Blessed be the God of mercy — at the shrine Of thought inviolate the wells of peace.  There, fortified and unmolested, long Have I in contemplation rued the plight Of all my kind, and reverently aspired To ponder out our mission, unconvinced That we are born the dupes of Providence, To be a nation's burden and her taunt, Or Ishmaels of an unchosen land.  My quest has been to know the good of life, And why a race should be, and what endures Of that which man has called society, And - last and highest aim of these pursuits To learn what perfect service, born of throes Dreadful but purgative, we yet might dare To offer thee, O country of our hope. And from these musings — thanks to Him Whose citadels are stars, with time and space Their pylons, but Who builds His favored home Upon the docile trust of lowly hearts Proceeded comfort, patience to endure, And strength increasing of a faith sublime Which neither infidelity in arms, Nor all the bitter usage of the world Can e'er avail to tarnish or impair. For looking out upon the world I saw No hope for future man in those who stand Upon the heights of power, save in the tales Transmitted of their slow decline and fall. Because they spurn the truth of brotherhood, And trade in life, and mock the living God By high contempt of all His humbler sons, The strong battalions of eternal right And nature's law make their discomfort sure.  They prove the error of that pride of race And nation which has been the world's despite, And unloosed Mammon for a thousand years. Not all their transient lordship of the earth, Their cunning in the traffic of the world, The condescension of their patronage, Or thundering proclamations of their might, Can check the springs of pity, while our prayers Besiege the throne of mercy for their weal.  But looking in upon my stricken peers, I saw upon their swarthy brows “the gleam;" I saw the lineaments of hope new-born For peoples yet to be. O scorn it not, Ye mighty of all lands, ye that are raised To glory on the necks of trampled men ! For now within your midst are multitudes Puissant though despised, meek men of prayer, Dark, shackled knights of labor, clinging still Amidst a universal wreck of faith To cheerfulness, and foreigners to hate. These know ye not, these have ye not received, But these shall speak to you Beatitudes.  Around them surge the tides of all your strife, Above them rise the august monuments Of all your outward splendor, but they stand Unenvious in thought, and bide their time. Because ye schooled them in the arts of life, And gave to them your God, and poured your blood Into their veins to make them what they are, They shall not fail you in your hour of need.  They hold in them enough of you to feel All that has made you masters in your time The power of art and wealth, unending toil, Proud types of beauty, an unbounded will To triumph, wondrous science, and old law These have they learned to value and to share. But deeper in them still is something steeled To hot abhorrence and unmeasured dread Of your undaunted sins against the light Red sins of lust, of envy and of greed, Of guilty gain extorted from the weak, Of brotherhood traduced and God denied.  All this have they beheld without revolt, And borne the brunt in agonizing prayer. For those deep strains of blood that flow from times Older than Egypt, whence the dark man gave The rudiments of learning to all lands, Have been a strong constraint. And they have dreamed Of a peculiar mission under heaven, And felt the force of unexampled gifts That make for them a rare inheritance The gift of cheerful confidence in men, The gift of calm endurance, solacing An infinite capacity for pain, The gift of an unfeigned humility That blinds the eyes of strident arrogance And bigot pride to that philosophy And that far-glancing wisdom which it veils, The gift of feeling for all forms of life, Of deathless hope in trouble, and of wide Adaptive power without a parallel In chronicles of men, and over all, And more than all besides, the gift of God Expressed in rhythmic miracles of song.  O these are gifts, I said a thousand times Richer than Ophir, stronger than the might Of armament to conquer and to cure Gifts destined yet to permeate the earth, To heal it of its mighty heresies, And all its brutal blasphemy of war. So viewing all my brothers in distress, Hindered and cursed and aliens, I have wept And prayed for them in solitude apart, That they might know themselves a chosen folk, Unrecognized but potent, chastened still, But chartered to be ministers of truth, To search the depths of spirit, to go forth To woo and win a perfect self-control, To breed strong children exercised in prayer, Shunning as they would death the patterns set By those who hold the kingdoms and the sway. So might they with the pregnant years become New arbiters of social destiny, New health veins in the body politic, A high-commissioned people, mingled through With all the bloods of man, and, counselling Peace, and the healing grace of brotherhood, "Have power in this dark world to lighten it, And power in this dead world to make it live."  When through my being, like a lyre strung, These winds of temporal occurrence sweep, I hear a kind of music, high and low, And ranging from the tortured earth to heaven, Throbbing with tragic cadence to express The passing and the coming life of man . And though the tempests rage and earth be stirred To her foundations, though the lucid air Become a menace, and the beauteous world Be bathed in fire, I am undismayed. The cataclysmic travail prophecies The dawn of one world-conscience for all men, The breaking up of caste and race and creed, The warfare of all war against itself. And hence in my low place this living peace That grows and deepens, while the staggered frames Of ancient kingdoms reel beneath a weight Of crimes so vast that genius strives in vain To compass them in thought: for out of this, The spirit saith, shall issue other breeds Soul-burdened like my brothers, and like them Despised and trammeled, but sent forth to teach That nothing in the changing world endures But truth and love and brotherhood and God .
__label__political O BROTHERS mine, take care! Take care!     The great white witch rides out to-night.     Trust not your prowess nor your strength,     Your only safety lies in flight;     For in her glance there is a snare,             And in her smile there is a blight.       The great white witch you have not seen?     Then, younger brothers mine, forsooth,     Like nursery children you have looked     For ancient hag and snaggle-tooth;             But no, not so; the witch appears     In all the glowing charms of youth.       Her lips are like carnations, red,     Her face like new-born lilies, fair,     Her eyes like ocean waters, blue,             She moves with subtle grace and air,     And all about her head there floats     The golden glory of her hair.       But though she always thus appears     In form of youth and mood of mirth,             Unnumbered centuries are hers,     The infant planets saw her birth;     The child of throbbing Life is she,     Twin sister to the greedy earth.       And back behind those smiling lips,             And down within those laughing eyes,     And underneath the soft caress     Of hand and voice and purring sighs,     The shadow of the panther lurks,     The spirit of the vampire lies.               For I have seen the great white witch,     And she has led me to her lair,     And I have kissed her red, red lips     And cruel face so white and fair;     Around me she has twined her arms,             And bound me with her yellow hair.       I felt those red lips burn and sear     My body like a living coal;     Obeyed the power of those eyes     As the needle trembles to the pole;             And did not care although I felt     The strength go ebbing from my soul.       Oh! she has seen your strong young limbs,     And heard your laughter loud and gay,     And in your voices she has caught             The echo of a far-off day,     When man was closer to the earth;     And she has marked you for her prey.       She feels the old Antaean strength     In you, the great dynamic beat             Of primal passions, and she sees     In you the last besieged retreat     Of love relentless, lusty, fierce,     Love pain-ecstatic, cruel-sweet.       O, brothers mine, take care! Take care!             The great white witch rides out to-night.     O, younger brothers mine, beware!     Look not upon her beauty bright;     For in her glance there is a snare,     And in her smile there is a blight. 
__label__political To come so near, and yet not touch the goal!    To sight! Its gleaming bars, like some pale pilgrim soul        Hails light,    After the weary night. To feel the unbounded joy! My efforts crowned    At last!  Then strive to leap, and find my feet are bound,       And fast;    My short-lived freedom past! To see my fond hopes crumble as do things In dreams;  My skin a burden that should serve as wings!       It seems     The earth with passion teems!  To live with the books, to teach my eager brain       To act, And every noble power and gift to train        With tact–    Then meet this time-worn fact:  That prejudicial bars rise everywhere.       My race, My barrier. For this my soul must bear       Disgrace,    And opposition face.   How long shall I restrain the hot life-tide       Whose flow With just resentment surges? Must I bide        This blow? And this? And this? And fearful hide?       And cringing terror show?  Or shall I let the prejudice of  years        Go by, With outward passivness, and inward tears,       And die?  Or leave unsatisfied my tears,       Nor even question why?  And this is freedom? This is liberty?       The place Where justice reigns? “Home of the brave and and free”?       Look! Trace The deepened furrows of servility        Upon a burdened race!  Jehovah, burn into our faith’s weak ray       Thy might. We crave but half a chance to blaze a way        To light,    To dawn, from racial night.  God of a trampled race! We must, we dare       Be free! Free, that we may be men! We leave our fare        With thee.  If only in the battles wear and tear, Thou’ll lead our host through fog or noon-day glare       To freedom! Liberty! 
__label__political A great swart cheek and the gleam of tears, The flutter of hopes and the shadow of fears, And all day long the rub and scrub With only a breath betwixt tub and tub. Fool! Thou hast toiled for fifty years And what hast thou now but thy dusty tears? In silence she rubbed . . . But her face I had seen, Where the light of her soul fell shining and clean. 
__label__political Man was I born, tho garbed tho garbed in hue of night, Disorderly of feature, crowned with stubborn hair. Part, yea, and parcel of the God am I: His Mind, His Spirit, His great Soul all live in me.  Omnipotence, omniscience, these alone bounds my life shall know, To grow toward God each day in mind and soul Till I shall come into mine own inheritance; For God in black and white is just the same. Then, shall my fellow man set me no bounds.  Man was I born, so shall I die-A Man. 
__label__political Katharine Gilliard “Just a Little Tired”   Just a little tired, waiting Through the night For the new day to be breaking  Into light. Just a little tired, yearning For the blast  In the land of no returning God-and rest. Just a little tired, trying Yet again– To smile and cease the crying  Through the pain. Just a little tired, bending “Neath the rod, Though the rough, bleak way is wending  Up to God. Just a little tired, facing Blows that fall Unexpected; tired placing Trust in all. Just a little tired, falling– Blund’ring here. Ideals gone beyond recalling Friends once dear.  Just a little tired, waiting Through the night  For the new morn to be breaking Clear and bright.  
__label__political Our separate winding ways we trod, Along the highways, unto God, Unbonded by the clasp of hand, Without a vow, we understand. Forever the strange fusing kiss– Omnipotent– we bide in this– They need no trammeling of bars, Whose souls were welded with the stars. 
__label__political The infant eyes looked out amazed upon the frowning earth, A stranger, in a stranger land, child of the mantled-birth; Waxing, he wondered more and more; the scowling grew apace; A world, behind its barring doors, reviles his ebon face: Yet, 'mid this maelstrom forms a man and like to God is he! He loves a world, allloveless, and can smile -- on Calvary!
__label__political See! There he stands; not brave, but with an air Of sullen stupor. Mark him well! Is he Not more like brute than man? Look in his eye! No light is there; none, save the glint that shines In the now glaring, and now shifting orbs Of some wild animal caught in the hunter's trap.  How came this beast in human shape and form? Speak, man! - We call you man because you wear His shape-How are you thus? Are you not from That docile, child-like, tender-hearted race Which we have known three centuries? Not from That more than faithful race which through three wars Fed our dear wives and nursed our helpless babes Without a single breach of trust? Speak out!     I am, and am not.       Then who, why are you?    I am a thing not new, I am as old  As human nature. I am that which lurks, Ready to spring whenever a bar is loosed; The ancient trait which fights incessantly Against restraint, balks at the upward climb; The weight forever seeking to obey The law of downward pull; and I am more: The bitter fruit am I of planted seed; The resultant, the inevitable end Of evil forces and the powers of wrong.    Lessons in degradation, taught and learned, The memories of cruel sights and deeds, The pent-up bitterness, the unspent hate Filtered through fifteen generations have Sprung up and found in me sporadic life. In me the muttered curse of dying men, On me the stain of conquered women, and Consuming me the fearful fires of lust, Lit long ago, by other hands than mine. In me the down-crushed spirit, the hurled-back prayers Of wretches now long dead,--their dire bequests,-- In me the echo of the stifled cry Of children for their bartered mothers' breasts.  I claim no race, no race claims me; I am No more than human dregs; degenerate; The monstrous offspring of the monster, Sin; I am-just what I am . . . . The race that fed Your wives and nursed your babes would do the same To-day, but I - Enough, the brute must die! Quick! Chain him to that oak! It will resist The fire much longer than this slender pine. Now bring the fuel! Pile it 'round him! Wait! Pile not so fast or high! or we shall lose The agony and terror in his face. And now the torch! Good fuel that! the flames Already leap head-high. Ha! hear that shriek! And there's another! Wilder than the first. Fetch water! Water! Pour a little on The fire, lest it should burn too fast. Hold so! Now let it slowly blaze again. See there! He squirms! He groans! His eyes bulge wildly out, Searching around in vain appeal for help! Another shriek, the last! Watch how the flesh Grows crisp and hangs till, turned to ash, it sifts Down through the coils of chain that hold erect The ghastly frame against the bark-scorched tree.  Stop! to each man no more than one man's share. You take that bone, and you this tooth; the chain - Let us divide its links; this skull, of course, In fair division, to the leader comes.  And now his fiendish crime has been avenged; Let us back to our wives and children. - Say, What did he mean by those last muttered words, 'Brothers in spirit, brothers in deed are we'? 
__label__political Ah, whether I loved you, who can say? What of the chaff that lies i’ the way Of the wind blown off of the desert grey? (But I love you now–how well!) You choose me for love and I went with you  Yielding as reeds that the stream runs through– What was a broken heart to you? (But you taught me to love you well!)  Un-eager I was for your first long kiss–  Unstirred was my blood to your touch that is Today of fire, for Beloved, this Is verily love’s own spell.  My body and soul are yours to mend Or break or yet to with your own to blend. Ah, Master, keep me until the end– I have learned to love too well! 
__label__political Alas, My Country! Thou wilt have no need Of enemy to bring thee to thy doom If these be they on whom we must rely To prove the right and honor of our arms."  Thus spake Abdullah, gazing, with sad eyes And heart fear-stricken, on the motley horde Of Turks now gathered in with feverish haste To meet the dread, on-coming Bulgar host. Truly he spake, for scarce the foes had met When the wild flight began, the vengeful sword Of the Bulgarian taking fearful toll As fleeing thousands fall to rise no more. Surely the years bring on the fatal day To that dark land, from whose unhallowed ground The blood of countless innocents so long Has cried to God, nor longer cries in vain.  But not alone by war a nation falls. Tho' she be fair, serene as radiant morn, Tho' girt by seas, secure in armament, Let her but spurn the Vision of the Cross; Tread with contemptuous feet on its command Of Mercy, Love and Human Brotherhood, And she, some fateful day, shall have no need Of enemy to bring her to the dust. Some day, tho' distant it may be—with God A thousand years are but as yesterday— The germs of hate, injustice, violence, Like an insidious canker in the blood, Shall eat the nation's vitals. She shall see Break forth the blood-red tide of anarchy, Sweeping her plains, laying her cities low, And bearing on its seething, crimson flood The wreck of government, of home, and all The nation's pride, its splendor and its power; On, with relentless flow, into the sea Of God's eternal vengeance wide and deep, But for God's grace! Oh, may it hold thee fast, My Country, until justice shall prevail O'er wrong and o'er oppression's cruel power, And all that makes humanity to mourn.  
__label__political I build my nest not on the crest Of the mountain-throne, but in the breast– The sheltering arm of the forest warm, Where my dovelets swing ‘mid the maddest storm; Here I see and sigh! ‘neath the grieving sky,  Lo, a race is hung on the trees! A-wing I go, and the land below  Is riot-red with a cruel woe; For the hand of Hate, at a furious rate, Is sowing the seeds of a terrible fate; And each venomous seed is the prejudice weed That buds and blooms with a murderous deed! Oh, I love the land of Justice grand,  Where men are free, heart, head and hand; Where the smile and nod of the greening sod Are bright and and glad with the gift of God: Where over the plains and the mountainous reigns The flag that frees each soul from chains! “Land of the free,” whose flag I see! What boots thy boast of Liberty?   What avails thy might, while in thy sight A race is robbed of its dearest right? Hark! I hear the yell of the hounds of hell– Thy sons obsessed with the lynching spell! How I long to see thy Liberty With e’en thy lowliest subject free; With none denied or crushed in pride, But souls ascending side by side; Thy streaming Stars and bleeding Bars Thus mean a victory more than war’s! “Let freedom ring”- ‘tis a well to sing,  But let it from the mountains bring– Not only to the fortunate few– Its peace to all ‘neath the “Red, White and Blue!” Ah! I see and sigh, ‘neath the heavens high, While a race is hung on the trees to die! 
__label__political She held him in her bronzen arms    And fed him from her lavish breast, And rid him of a child's alarms,    With songs that gave him rest.  He loved her tenderly, he said,    And vowed to fill her life with pleasure. He's growing old and she is dead,    A picture in his memory's treasure.  But once he paused upon the bench    Ere yet he spake the final sentence Upon a slender black-faced wench,    Whose eyes were grime with unrepentance:  "Old Mammy's child! Tut! Tut! 'Tis bad    For one so young to mock the law. Your mother's eyes must deepen sad,    She looked upon these things with awe."  
__label__political The Dawn’s awake!     A flash of smoldering flame and fire Ignites the East. Then, higher, higher,     O’er all the sky so gray, forlorn,  The torch of gold is borne.   The Dawn’s awake!    The dawn of a thousand dreams and thrills.  And music singing in the hills     A paean of eternal spring  Voices the new awakening.   The Dawn’s awake!       Whispers of pent-up harmonies,  With the mingled fragrance of the trees;       Faint snaches of half-forgotten song— Fathers! Torn and numb,—    The boon of light we craved, awaited long,  Has come, has come!  
__label__political I MINGLE my goblet with oil of the vine, And drink to the health of a maid most benign; No less do I drink to her beauty and youth, Than to her meek innocence, virtue and truth; And meekly arrayed in thy modest brocade, I drink to thy health, Ethiopian maid. 'Mid noon-tide and moon-tide whatever my themes, Thy vision creeps in the enchantments of dreams; The pipings of skylarks and trills of the wren Are mixed in the midst of the melody when Thy laughter rings out in the vine scented glade, As I drink to thy health, Ethiopian maid. When sun of the tropics turns westward and dies, The magic still lingers in light of thine eyes; I mingle my goblet with oil of the palm, Where spices hang over and summer smiles warm, And there, 'mid the magic of forest and shade, I drink thy sweet health, Ethiopian maid. 
__label__political In the Still Night  IN the still night there comes to me The blessed boon of liberty. From all the cares that chafed and choked, The spirit is at last unyoked To seek her heaven, as she ought, On sturdy wings of fearless thought. Then come the dreams which through the day The moil of living shuts away . Then can the soul her fountains fill, While all the universe is still, From streams of quietness that rise Out of the hills of Paradise.  And I can tell the day was meant For some design beneficent, For sweet-imagined sounds I hear, And forms of beauty hover near To win me to the perfect trust That life is good, and God is just, And permeates His world whereof The essence and the end is love.
__label__political And they shall rise and cast their mantles by, Erect and strong and visioned, in the day That rings the knell of Curfew o'er the sway Of prejudice — who reels with mortal cry To lift no more her leprous, blinded eye. Reft of the fetters, far more cursed than they Which held dominion o'er human clay. The spirit soars aloft where rainbows lie.  Like joyful exiles swift returning home — The rhythmic chanson of their eager feet. While voices strange to ecstasy, long dumb. Break forth in major rhapsodies, full sweet. Into the very star-shine, lo! they come Wearing the bays of victory complete!  
__label__political I climbed the the craggy hill of fame, Heart-sore and wearily, Stood on her gleaming goal at length, And sighed in ecstasy. “O, God” I cried, “what bliss’-when lo!  Came stealing like a pall, The strains of Life’s Last Symphony,  In Prelude, to–the call. 
__label__political Happy youth in joyous laughter, Wafts me pensively alone O'er the winding way where morrow Claims the Mantled for her own.  I can hear their voices ringing  Down the corridor of years, As they lift their twilight faces, Through a mist of falling tears! 
__label__political I hear you singing happily, My boy of tarnished mien, Lifting your limpid, trustful gaze In innocence serene. A thousand javelins of pain Assault my heaving breast When I behold the storm of years That beat without your nest. O sing, my lark, your matin song Of joyous rhapsody, Distil the sweetness of the hours In gladsome ecstasy. For time awaits your buoyant flight Across the bar of years. Sing, sing your song, my bonny lark, Before it melts in tears!
__label__political The mother soothes her mantled child With incantation sad and wild; A deep compassion brims her eye And stills upon her lips, the sigh.  Her thoughts are leaping down the years, O’er branding bars, through seething tears, Her heart is sandaling his feet Adown the world’s corroding street.  Then, with a start she dons a smile His tender yearnings to beguile. And only God will ever know The wordless measure of her woe. 
__label__political That dusky child upon your knee Is breath of God’s eternity; Direct his vision to the height — Let naught obscure his royal right.  Although the highways to renown Are iron-barred by fortune’s frown, ‘Tis his to forge the master-key That wields the locks of destiny! 
__label__political Frail children of sorrow, dethroned by a hue, The shadows are flecked by the rose sifting through, The world has its motion, all things pass away. No night is omnipotent, there must be day. The oak tarries long in the depth of the seed, But swift is the season of nettle and weed. Abide yet awhile in the mellowing shade. And rise with the hour for which you were made. The cycle of seasons, the tidals of man Revolve in the orb of an infinite plan. We move to the rhythm of ages long done, And each has his hour — to dwell in the sun! 
__label__political How would you have us, as we are? Or sinking 'neath the load we bear? Our eyes fixed forward on a star? Or gazing empty at despair?  Rising or falling? Men or things? With dragging pace or footsteps fleet? Strong, willing sinews in your wings? Or tightening chains about your feet?
__label__political Ancestral Spirit, hidden from my sight By modern Time's unnumbered works and ways On which in awe and wonderment I gaze, Where hid'st thou in the deepness of the night? What evil powers thy healing presence blight? Thou who from out the dark and dust didst raise The Ethiop standard in the curtained days, Before the white God said: Let there be light! Bring ancient music to my modern heart, Let fall the light upon my sable face That once gleamed on the Ethiopian's art; Lift me to thee out of this alien place So I may be, thine exiled counterpart, The worthy singer of my world and race.
__label__political I Am Black. Pouskin or Dumas or Toussaint L’Overture. I am Black. I have been the path of the Centuries And Pharoes and Napoleons have  Trod me up to glory. I am Black. Ham or Othello or Crispus Attucks–  I have been fuel for the  Flame of Progress.  I have reared the everlasting Pyramids And have flung Nineveh and Babylon Up to God.  I am Black.  I have dredged the Nile That Civilization might bring  Darkness unto me. I have cut marble and granite For Rome and Carthage.  I have lifted the rocks from Culebra and Pedro Miguel  And have watched the Seas meet. I am Black. I have been the great Burden-bearer, The rungs in the ladder of mine  Enemy. Mine Enemy has bound mine eyes. I have borne him to the mountain-top And he has gloried in the Sunlight  That I could not see.  But now I shall cast off the bandage From mine eyes  And I will see the glory  That I have made.  I am Black.
__label__political God set his soul to music, chord on chord, As sweet as Heaven's hosannas to the Lord: A lute of love moved by the Spirit Breath High as Eternal life and deep as Death!
__label__political God gave his struggling soul a Dream    That in its birth, A Beauty and a Joy Supreme    Might bless the earth. He dreamed. Along the Heavenward way     Of Love Divine Men saw the Light and, day by day,    Knelt at the shrine. 
__label__political God gave us the gift of song, And bade us fill the world with tears Of Happiness; when days were long, To make a melody of fears.  God gave us the power to feel The joy of passions exquisite, Courage to suffer, and the zeal Of yearning for the infinite.   God gave us the strength to die, To follow through the dark agrope, A stretch of dreary, rimless sky-- God gave us the boon of hope.  
__label__political We who are dark And know the lash On bodies worn, Insensate made Through years of wrong; That feel no more The scourge, the whip-- We who are dark And know the hurt Of pitiless scorn On souls that live And feel the dart And thrust of wrong; The greedy glance Of sinful lust-- We who are dark And know the urge Of blinding rage And fury red, that eats and burns; the ache of hands Pressed on by hearts On vengeance bent-- We've won your praise That side by side With those who taught Us all our woes We bravely march Nor backward glance, Not hesitant, Nor slow, but with Quickening treat Old wrongs, old sores Forgotten lie; Brothers-in-arms, As we march forth To Victory, Bearing aloft To foreign lands A freedom sweet That's not our own.  
__label__political Dedicated to the Ninety-Second Division, U. S. National Army  They shall go down unto Life's Borderland, Walk unafraid within that Living Hell,  Nor heed the driving rain of shot and shell That 'round them falls; but with uplifted hand Be one with mighty hosts, and armed band Against man's wrong to man- for such full well They know. And from their trembling lips shall swell A song of hope the world can understand.  All this to them shall be a glorious sign,  A glimmer of that Resurrection Morn,  When age-long Faith, crowned with a grace benign,  Shall rise and from their blows cast down the thorn.  Of Prejudice.  E'en through blood it be,  There breaks this day their dawn of Liberty. 
__label__political I  THE breath of the harvest is in the air. The boys of Ethiopia, khaki clad, are bidding farewell to the city of their love. They are swinging the corner to the tune of   "John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave,  But his soul goes marching on."  We men and women of Ethiopia are waving handkerchiefs and moistening our cheeks with tear drops. It is farewell time for our young life.   How many of these that walk so proudly behind the flag of Appomattox will the warm earth of France receive? How many will be dust to keep alive the lilies?   Ethiopia is paying her debt to the nation that gave the world Dumas.   II  Toussaint, old man of the mountains, is tramping the streets of Port au Prince.  "Whither do you go, Graybeard?" challenges the sentry.   Toussaint's voice is soft and low.  "I go to arouse the sleeping men of Ethiopia.   "This is the hour that tries the nations and the races.   "War is a young man's glory, an old man's remembrance.  "France is bowed in desolation. To her I dedicate the young men of my blood that she might be saved from the claw of the vulture.  "Fear not, land that exalted Bonaparte! Toussaint hears thy call."  III  How desolate is State Street, now that war has come upon the land!  How desolate the Cabaret. Who can be gay now that the young are about to die? The pavement of a street that once held rendezvous with music is wet with tears of those who have given loved ones to the cause.   No longer walk the merchant, lawyer, doctor, thief and toiler along the lighted path of this merry thoroughfare. The khaki makes all men one.   Old men are peddling dreams of a new Ethiopia; old women and young women long for the laughter of State Street grown sober.   On with lights! Death, the new jester, holds the heart of my people in the hollow of his hand.   IV  The Armory is silent beneath a firmament of gray.   No longer the young men bombard its walls the laughter of youth.   The young girls, brown as the autumn landscape or yellow as the noonday glow, pass by, lonely and dejected.   How many Novembers, how many Decembers will die before laughter again runs riot?  V  God heard his children in the night.  God turned to him who sits on His right hand and said:   "What is this, like the wailing of music, that reaches my throne?   "'Tis the children of the oppressed crying for succor, I have heard their prayer night and day.   "Ethiopia is in pain, Israel is bleeding, Poland is no more, India is weary of the strange gods that infest her groves. The tomb of my Son is desecrated and Jerusalem is the dwelling place of Gentiles.  "Man has grown arrogant. The beast on him is not yet dead.  "Go, Thou Angel of Wrath, into the four corners of the earth and spill the seeds of discord!  "Freedom shall prevail"  The Angel of Wrath is riding the winds of the earth. Look up, Ethiopia, and be comforted! 
__label__political Think ye I am not fiend and savage too? Think ye I could not arm me with a gun And shoot down ten of you for every one Of my black brothers murdered, burnt by you? Be not deceived, for every deed ye do I could match--out-match: am I not Afric's son, Black of that black where black deeds are done? But the Almighty from the darkness drew My soul and said: Even thou shalt be a light Awhile to burn on the benighted earth, Thy dusky face I set among the white For thee to prove thyself of highest worth; Before the world is swallowed up in night, To show thy little lamp; go forth! go forth!
__label__political (The Dew-drier)  It is a custom in some parts of Africa for travelers into the jungles to send before them in the early morning little African boys called “Dew-driers” to brush with their bodies the dew from the high grasses—and be, perchance, the first to meet the leopard’s or hyena’s challenge—and so open the road. “Human Brooms,” Dan Crawford calls them.  Brother to the firefly— For as the firefly lights the night So lights he the morning— Bathed in the dank dews as he goes forth Through heavy menace and mystery Of half-waking tropic dawns, Behold a little black boy, a naked black boy, Sweeping aside with his slight frame Night’s pregnant tears, And making a morning path to the light For the tropic traveler!  Bathed in the blood of battle, Treading toward a new morning, May not his race—its body long bared to the world’s disdain, Its face schooled to smile for a light to come— May not his race, even as the dew-boy leads, Bear onward the world toward a new day-dawn When tolerance, forgiveness, Such as reigned in the heart of One Whose heart was gold, Shall shape the earth for that fresh dawning      After the dews of blood? 
__label__political She cradles him, her babe, upon her breast, Great with this joy of all the earth most dear. A lullaby, touched with a trembling tear. She croons to Heaven; it is a prayer exprest that he, her boy, may triumph in life's test. He sleeps in dreamless peace, his listless ear Close to her gentle heart of love sincere-- The strength that is her soul's immortal best.  Madonna! many a son you offer up On Truth's eternal Cross of Calvary; And you have drunk of each's death brimming cup. Down in the vale of God's Gethsemane. Dear Lord! this woman and her children sup The gall of death--for Boundless Liberty.  
__label__political Out in the night thou art the sun Toward which thy soul-charmed children run, The faith-high height whereon they see The glory of their Day To Be,-- The peace at last when all is done.   The Night is dark but, one by one, Thy signals, ever and anon, Smile beacon answers to their plea, Out in the Night.  Ah, Life! thy storms these cannot shun; Give them a hope to rest upon, A Dream to dream eternally. The strength of men who would be free And win the battle-race begun, Out in the Night.  
__label__political Be strong, my son! The weakling never can secure  The thing for which he strives. For he  Who rests, and there supinely waits For some chance guerdon of reward, But waits in vain. Be strong! Be strong! Have faith, my son! For if weith all thy strength, thou canst Not feel that God is on His throne, Nor know that all thy life is but A prelude to a larger growth, Thy strength were vain. Have faith in God! 
__label__political Pure speech, sure speech, speech that always blends With the rugged mettle of a foe's or friend's, Is thine, good preacher, thine.  Fair ways, rare ways, ways that lead us on  To the fuller morning from a meager dawn, Are thine, wise preacher, thine.   New thought, true thought, thought that points the way Through doubt's mists and shadows to good God's man-wrought day, Is thine, brave preacher, thine.   Old faith, bold faith, faith whose anchors still Grapple in the fastness of the sane man's will, Is thine, firm preacher, thine.   Far dreams, star dreams, dreams that hedge us in From the rocks of passion and the shoals of sin, Are thine, great preacher, thine.   Clean life, serene life, life that knows not shame, Life that's writ in service on the scroll of fame, Is thine, loved preacher, thine.  
__label__political I that had found the way so smooth    With gilly-flowers that beck and nod, Now find that same road wild and steep    With need for compass and for rod. And yet with feet that bleed, I pant    On blindly--stumbling back to God! 
__label__political One  drop of midnight in the dawn of life's pulsating stream Marks her an alien from her kind, a shade amid its gleam Forevermore her step she bends, insular, strange, apart And none can read the riddle of her strangely warring heart. The stormy current of her blood, beats like a mighty sea Against the man-wrought iron bars of her captivity. For refuge, succor, peace and rest, she seeks that humble fold Whose every breath is kindliness, whose hearts are purest gold! 
__label__political Shall I say, “My son, you’re branded in this country’s pageantry, By strange subtleties you’re tethered, and no forum sets you free?” Shall I mark the young lights fading through your soul-enchannelled eye, As the dusky pall of shadows screen the highway of your sky?  Or shall I, with love prophetic, bid you dauntlessly arise. Spurn the handicap that clogs you, taking what the world denies, Bid you storm the sullen fortress wrought by prejudice and wrong With a faith that shall not falter, in your heart and on your tongue! 
__label__political These fell miasmic rings of mist, with ghoulish menace bound, Like noose-horizons tightening my little world around, They still the soaring will to wing, to dance, to speed away. And fling the soul insurgent back into its shell of clay:  Beneath incrusted silences, a seething Etna lies. The fire of whose furnaces may sleep — but never dies! 
__label__political I must not gaze at them although Your eyes are dawning day; I must not watch you as you go Your sun-illumined way;  I hear but I must never heed The fascinating note, Which, fluting like a river reed, Comes from your trembling throat;  I must not see upon your face Love’s softly glowing spark; For there’s the barrier of race, You’re fair and I am dark.
__label__political O whisper, O my soul! The afternoon Is waning into evening, whisper soft! Peace, O my rebel heart! for soon the moon From out its misty veil will swing aloft! Be patient, weary body, soon the night Will wrap thee gently in her sable sheet, And with a leaden sigh thou wilt invite To rest thy tired hands and aching feet. The wretched day was theirs, the night is mine; Come tender sleep, and fold me to thy breast. But what steals out the gray clouds red like wine? O dawn! O dreaded dawn! O let me rest Weary my veins, my brain, my life! Have pity! No! Once again the harsh, the ugly city.
__label__political If we must die, let it not be like hogs Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot, While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs, Making their mock at our accursed lot. If we must die, O let us nobly die, So that our precious blood may not be shed In vain; then even the monsters we defy Shall be constrained to honor us though dead! O kinsmen! we must meet the common foe! Though far outnumbered let us show us brave, And for their thousand blows deal one death-blow! What though before us lies the open grave? Like men we’ll face the murderous, cowardly pack, Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back!
__label__political Too green the springing April grass, Too blue the silver-speckled sky, For me to linger here, alas, While happy winds go laughing by, Wasting the golden hours indoors, Washing windows and scrubbing floors. Too wonderful the April night, Too faintly sweet the first May flowers, The stars too gloriously bright, For me to spend the evening hours, When fields are fresh and streams are leaping, Wearied, exhausted, dully sleeping.
__label__political I Lit with cheap colored lights a basement den, With rows of chairs and tables on each side, And, all about, young, dark-skinned women and men Drinking and smoking, merry, vacant-eyed. A Negro band, that scarcely seems awake, Drones out half-heartedly a lazy tune, While quick and willing boys their orders take And hurry to and from the near saloon. Then suddenly a happy, lilting note Is struck, the walk and hop and trot begin, Under the smoke upon foul air afloat; Around the room the laughing puppets spin To sound of fiddle, drum and clarinet, Dancing, their world of shadows to forget. II ’Tis best to sit and gaze; my heart then dances To the lithe bodies gliding slowly by, The amorous and inimitable glances That subtly pass from roguish eye to eye, The laughter gay like sounding silver ringing, That fills the whole wide room from floor to ceiling,— A rush of rapture to my tried soul bringing— The deathless spirit of a race revealing. Not one false step, no note that rings not true! Unconscious even of the higher worth Of their great art, they serpent-wise glide through The syncopated waltz. Dead to the earth And her unkindly ways of toil and strife, For them the dance is the true joy of life. III And yet they are the outcasts of the earth, A race oppressed and scorned by ruling man; How can they thus consent to joy and mirth Who live beneath a world-eternal ban? No faith is theirs, no shining ray of hope, Except the martyr’s faith, the hope that death Some day will free them from their narrow scope And once more merge them with the infinite breath. But, oh! they dance with poetry in their eyes Whose dreamy loveliness no sorrow dims, And parted lips and eager, gleeful cries, And perfect rhythm in their nimble limbs. The gifts divine are theirs, music and laughter; All other things, however great, come after.
__label__political Tis but a modern Roman holiday; Each state invokes its soul of basest passion, ​Each vies with each to find the ugliest way ​To torture Negroes in the fiercest fashion. ​Black Southern men, like hogs await your doom! White wretches hunt and haul you from your huts, ​They squeeze the babies out your women's womb, ​They cut your members off, rip out your guts! It is a Roman holiday, and worse, It is the mad beast risen from his lair, ​The dead accusing years' eternal curse. ​Reeking of vengeance, in fulfilment here. ​Bravo, Democracy! Hail greatest Power That saved sick Europe in her darkest hour!
__label__political The little peoples of the troubled earth,  The little nations that are weak and white;--- For them the glory of another birth, For them the lifting of the veil of night. The big men of the world in concert met, Have sent forth in their power a new decree: Upon the old harsh wrongs the sun must set, Henceforth the little peoples must be free! But we, the blacks, less than the trampled dust, Who walk the new ways with the old dim eyes,--- We to the ancient gods of greed and lust Must still be offered up as sacrifice: Oh, we who deign to live but will not dare, The white world's burden must forever bear!
__label__political Some day, when trees have shed their leaves,    And against the morning's white The shivering birds beneath the eaves    Have sheltered for the night, We'n turn our faces southward, love,    Toward the summer isle Where bamboos spire the shafted grove    And wide-mouthed orchids smile. And we will seek the quiet hill    Where towers the cotton tree, And leaps the laughing crystal rill,    And works the droning bee. And we will build a lonely nest    Beside an open glade, And there forever will we rest,    O love---O nut-brown maid!
__label__political Far-fame d the spot where Douglass dwelt, Here pilgrims oft have knelt    In homage to his noble fame,    With blessings on his name, And gratitude heart-felt.  And now before a double shrine, In praises we combine    With Douglass, great and wise and good,    Devoted womanhood— 'Round both our garlands twine . In union strong throughout the land, A consecrated band,    A service measureless they wrought    When Cedar Hill they bought And saved from alien hand.  Fear not, faint not, O sable race! The truth naught can efface    Is writ on ev'ry passing breeze;    With women such as these Our fight is won a-pace.  (Josephine T. Washington, “Cedar Hill Saved” in The Crisis, February 1919)
__label__political Almighty God, as on Thy thousand hills, Thy rolling plains and down each sylvan slope, The sunlight of another year distills, And bids the world take on new life and hope, Grant, Thou, that we may rise refreshed, reborn, With courage high, despite war's lingering scars, Our spirits free from petty strife and scorn, And teeming with the message of the stars.  
__label__political Why I should grieve on a cheery day? For why fate lessens my scanty fare And flicks each light on my pilgrim's way, I do not know or care.  I will suppose that fate is just, I will suppose that grief is wise, And I will tread what path I must, To enter Paradise. 
__label__political He saw Life masquerade in Babylon, He saw Life jaded by the mystic Nile, While weaving tapestry of brick and sone To mesh its merriment and seal its smile. He brought the fore-time to this after-time, He questioned workers, warriors, poets, sages. Then whispered to himself: 'Nor tribe, nor clime, Nor God, nor Devil can unwed the ages.'  The Prophet felt the ache that we are feeling, The Prophet saw the greed that bows us under; And heard the echo of our tense appealing For brotherhood that dares not halt nor blunder. The Past will be the Present. Let us make To-day to-morrow for our children's sake.  
__label__political O God! Dip down Thy Hands into the flame ways of Thy Heavens; Splash back the foaming clouds, Strain out Thy Suns, And let the stars drip through, Upon the panting blindness of our ears.  This poem was originally published in The Crisis in April 1912. 
__label__political I can remember when I was a little, young girl, how my old mammy would sit out of doors in the evenings and look up at the stars and groan, and I would say, ‘Mammy, what makes you groan so?’ And she would say, ‘I am groaning to think  of my poor children; they do not know where I be and I don’t know where they be. I look up at the stars and they look up at the stars!’ —Sojourner Truth  I think I see her sitting, bowed and black, Stricken and seared with slavery’s mortal scars, Reft of her children, lonely, anguished, yet Still looking at the stars.  Symbolic mother, we thy myriad sons, Pounding our stubborn hearts on Freedom’s bars, Clutching our birthright, fight with faces set, Still visioning the stars! 
__label__political The chance here to be nobler men-- Filled with the conacious breath of God-- Whether free in the city's dine, Or delving wisely in the sod.  
__label__political It’s great to be a problem, A problem just like me; To have the world inquiring And asking what you be. You must be this, You can’t be that, Examined through and through; So different from all other men, The world is studying you. My grandfather cursed my father, For Noah cursed Ham, you know; Therefore, my father’s children, The rocky road must go. We can’t turn here, We can’t turn there, Because the world’s in doubt, What we would do, Where we would go, What we would be about. I’m sullen if I speak not, I’m insolent if I speak; Must curb my aspirations, I must be lowly, meek. I can’t eat here, I can’t sleep there, Must “Jim-Crow” on full fare; The world can’t know What I would do, If I were treated square. It’s great to be a problem, A problem just like me; To have the world inquiring And asking what you be.
__label__political The U.N.I.A. is a theme, Which millions are entwined With well wrought plans or business schemes, And brotherhood combined.   It means that all should fall in line, With the advancing guide: Responding to the sign of time, The new emblem of pride.   There are great adventures lie in wait, Make this a gorgeous year: Get out of that hesitating gate, The break of morn is near.   Our far off kin, of whom we’ve dreamed, Beyond the tossing wave: Await our coming to redeem The land, which God has gave.   About-face to that sunny shore! Where tyrants ruling bind: And hold enthralled, a stupid host Of untrained human mind.   In one procession let us charge! Forth with the lofty theme: ‘Till nations all salute the bark That bear, red, black and green.
__label__political God help the little colored child, And with her please abide, To help her bear the prejudice That comes from every side. Be with her in her daily toil, And when her work is o’er: Be with her when she goes to live Where sorrow is no more. No matter whither she may roam, She finds it hard to bear The taunting tongues of the unknown, Unless she has your care. It seems so hard to understand The attitude of those Who try to hurt another one, But oh, some day, who knows? A mighty battle may occur In honor of our right To live as other men will live. Are we to win the fight? O Lord a new hope we desire, To meet the other race, To let them see and know our hearts, And win a higher place! Oh, why have we been the oppressed? And suffered all in vain? Are we to have our equal rights? Are we to make the gain? Our eyes are open, and we see The wrongs done to our race. But when the battle has been fought, We’ll win a higher Grace.
__label__political Tonight, of Minnie are my thoughts, and I Am flashing sparks of love across the sea To Afric’s shore, where lies my destiny-- ’Tis there my future brief sojourn shall be. I’m pensive in this meditation’s swoon To hear a whisper from her heaving breast: I fancy she shall surely call me soon; Then on my arm her sacred head shall rest.   O hark! I hear her calling now to me; I must away! My soul’s at her command. The fairest rose in bloom across the sea-- Oh, how I long to join her heart and hand! How can I longer wait? I must pass through. My yearning for the tryst is like a cry: And she I know awaits the rendesvous. Ah, to her sacred bosom let me fly!
__label__political He loosed the shackles from the hand Bound for three-hundred years. His voice resounded through the land ‘Til millions sent up cheers.   He led his race out from the tomb Of darkness and despair. That crushed hopes might revive and bloom In liberty’s pure air.   He did not heed the cynic’s sneer-- His soul fell in a dream. And critics could not hush the lips That spoke of freedom’s theme.   He saw his mother country free-- Behold her rising star. And begged his countrymen to flee Where kin and loved ones are.   Inspired by God, one hundred years Became to him a day: He saw his kinsmen, heard their cry When future tyrants sway.   He saw them swept like driven tide To Canada’s retreat, Confined there by the ocean bars, And trampled under feet.   He saw his people pass away Like clouds that tempests rend. While idlers criticised and smiled, He was the black man’s friend.   Fired with a patriotic zeal That fanned his loving heart. He yearned his native land ties That aliens tore apart.   He saw a flag eyes could not see-- A nation yet unborn-- A land where black men might be free, The dawn of freedom’s morn.   He did not deem the price too dear (Whatever it might be) For black men to regain their soil And set their country free.  A Paul Revere that God hath raised Of Ethiopian fame, To rouse a nation and to fan Its fire into a flame.
__label__political Four million with one single aim To loose the shackled hand! Four million who have turned their eyes Toward their fatherland. Four million who demand the stake Shall not consume their kin! Four million seeking human rights, With God to help them win. Four million pointing to the past: Its skeletons concealed! Four million organized at last, That tyrants be revealed.   Four million crying for their rights To sail across the sea: Four million asking Liberty To set the black man free.   Four million, children all of slaves, Reared under stripes and stars, Hemmed in by the Atlantic waves Oppressors turn to bars.   Four million with one rally cry, And who are wide awake. Spurred on by hopes that cannot die For Egypt’s daughter’s sake.   Four million souls inspired to march Wherever Freedom’s hand Shall beckon, and to thrill the hearts Of black men of this land.   Four million who will not be hushed, Whose protests will not cease, Until their race, dragged through the mire, Shall find means of relief.
__label__political Aunt Sue has a head full of stories. Aunt Sue has a whole heart full of stories. Summer nights on the front porch Aunt Sue cuddles a brown-faced child to her bosom And tells him stories.  Black slaves Working in the hot sun, And black slaves Walking in the dewy night, And black slaves Singing sorrow songs on the banks of a mighty river Mingle themselves softly In the flow of old Aunt Sue's voice, Mingle themselves softly In the dark shadows that cross and recross Aunt Sue's stories.  And the dark-faced child, listening, Knows that Aunt Sue's stories are real stories. He knows that Aunt Sue Never got her stories out of any book at all, But that they came Right out of her own life.  And the dark-faced child is quiet Of a summer night Listening to Aunt Sue's stories. 
__label__political I've known rivers:  I've known rivers ancient as the world and older than the       flow of human blood in human veins.  My soul has grown deep like the rivers.  I bathed in the Euphrates when dawns were young. I built my hut near the Congo and it lulled me to sleep. I looked upon the Nile and raised the pyramids above it. I heard the singing of the Mississippi when Abe Lincoln       went down to New Orleans, and I've seen its muddy       bosom turn all golden in the sunset.  I've known rivers: Ancient, dusky rivers.  My soul has grown deep like the rivers. 
__label__political All day long upon his porch he sits,  And lives in dreams his life again, The cabin frolics, banjo songs, Like shadows pass before his ken. He dwells apart in that far clime: The border-land of human lives, Where men live only in their dreams, And faith in God alone survives.
__label__political Dark-skinned Mothers of America, Who sit today, perhaps, with bowed down head, Because your home is lonely since he left-- Leave all to God, and rise and smile instead; Stretch forthh tthe arms that nursed him as a child And guided his dear feet in ways of truth, Remembering how your love has glorified  And brightened all his earnest, hopeful youth. Stretch forth your ams to Heaven, and say to Him: 'God, I have given my best, my all, to fight In Freedom's holy name-- to live or die. Which seemeth best, for justice and for right! Grant thou, O God, that through this sacrifice, When blood has well atoned for ancient wrong, That Ethiopia's Sons may raise their heads And sing a louder, clearer, grander song.'  Let it be so, when this dread war shall cease, When hushed is every bitter cry of woe, That all your children who to earth are spared, In bonds of fellowship may firmer grow. For none were better, stronger, nor more brave, Than those of ours who sleep with ice-cold brow. Let other nations rise and plead our cause. And let them understand, who scorn us now!  
__label__political At first you’ll joy to see the playful snow, Like white moths trembling on the tropic air, Or waters of the hills that softly flow Gracefully falling down a shining stair.  And when the fields and streets are covered white And the wind-worried void is chilly, raw, Or underneath a spell of heat and light The cheerless frozen spots begin to thaw,  Like me you’ll long for home, where birds’ glad song Means flowering lanes and leas and spaces dry, And tender thoughts and feelings fine and strong, Beneath a vivid silver-flecked blue sky.  But oh! more than the changeless southern isles, When Spring has shed upon the earth her charm, You’ll love the Northland wreathed in golden smiles By the miraculous sun turned glad and warm.
__label__political The sun sought thy dim bed and brought forth light, The sciences were sucklings at thy breast; When all the world was young in pregnant night Thy slaves toiled at thy monumental best. Thou ancient treasure-land, thou modern prize, New peoples marvel at thy pyramids! The years roll on, thy sphinx of riddle eyes Watches the mad world with immobile lids. The Hebrews humbled them at Pharaoh’s name. Cradle of Power! Yet all things were in vain! Honor and Glory, Arrogance and Fame! They went. The darkness swallowed thee again. Thou art the harlot, now thy time is done, Of all the mighty nations of the sun.
__label__political I would be wandering in distant fields Where man, and bird, and beast, lives leisurely, And the old earth is kind, and ever yields Her goodly gifts to all her children free; Where life is fairer, lighter, less demanding, And boys and girls have time and space for play Before they come to years of understanding – Somewhere I would be singing, far away. For life is greater than the thousand wars Men wage for it in their insatiate lust, And will remain like the eternal stars, When all that shines to-day is drift and dust But I am bound with you in your mean graves, O black men, simple slaves of ruthless slaves.
__label__political Although she feeds me bread of bitterness, And sinks into my throat her tiger’s tooth, Stealing my breath of life, I will confess I love this cultured hell that tests my youth! Her vigor flows like tides into my blood, Giving me strength erect against her hate. Her bigness sweeps my being like a flood. Yet as a rebel fronts a king in state, I stand within her walls with not a shred Of terror, malice, not a word of jeer. Darkly I gaze into the days ahead, And see her might and granite wonders there, Beneath the touch of Time’s unerring hand, Like priceless treasures sinking in the sand.
__label__political I will not toy with it nor bend an inch. Deep in the secret chambers of my heart I muse my life-long hate, and without flinch I bear it nobly as I live my part. My being would be a skeleton, a shell, If this dark Passion that fills my every mood, And makes my heaven in the white world’s hell, Did not forever feed me vital blood. I see the mighty city through a mist‐-- The strident trains that speed the goaded mass, The poles and spires and towers vapor-kissed, The fortressed port through which the great ships pass, The tides, the wharves, the dens I contemplate, Are sweet like wanton loves because I hate.
__label__political Oh when I think of my long-suffering race, For weary centuries despised, oppressed, Enslaved and lynched, denied a human place In the great life line of the Christian West; And in the Black Land disinherited, Robbed in the ancient country of its birth, My heart grows sick with hate, becomes as lead, For this my race that has no home on earth. Then from the dark depths of my soul I cry To the avenging angel to consume The white man’s world of wonders utterly: Let it be swallowed up in earth’s vast womb, Or upward roll as sacrificial smoke To liberate my people from its yoke!
__label__political Far down, down through the city’s great, gaunt gut The gray train rushing bears the weary wind; In the packed cars the fans the crowd’s breath cut, Leaving the sick and heavy air behind. And pale-cheeked children seek the upper door To give their summer jackets to the breeze; Their laugh is swallowed in the deafening roar Of captive wind that moans for fields and seas; Seas cooling warm where native schooners drift Through sleepy waters, while gulls wheel and sweep, Waiting for windy waves the keels to lift Lightly among the islands of the deep; Islands of lofty palm trees blooming white That lend their perfume to the tropic sea, Where fields lie idle in the dew drenched night, And the Trades float above them fresh and free.
__label__political Upon thy purple mat thy body bare Is fine and limber like a tender tree. The motion of thy supple form is rare, Like a lithe panther lolling languidly, Toying and turning slowly in her lair. Oh, I would never ask for more of thee; Thou art so clean in passion and so fair. Enough! if thou wilt ask no more of mel
__label__political From Afric's sunny country From Ethiopia's world Where life is full of bounty And lands rolled down with gold From many a silent river From many a sun-kissed plain They call us to deliver Their land from error's chain All other prospect pleases And man alone is vile In hope we raise our voices To Thee the God above-- O show us some devices  With which to show our love. We shall not rest in silence We shall not hold our peace  Until the accursed violence Upon they people cease. O give us faith to conquer O give us strength to fight Until shall cease our languor  That men shall see the light. And then shall waft the story  O'er mountain, hill and plain, To God belongs the glory Christ has not died in vain. For Afric's trodden nation Shall know the God of might Shall seek His free salvation And battle for the right.
__label__political Lord, lift our race and set our feet Upon the solid rock, And life and happiness complete, Give to thy Negro flock.   This race so tried and trodden Has called aloud to Thee. And have we been forgotten? O Lord, how can it be?   We know Thou art our father, And hence we need Thy care And as we draw together We ask Thee to draw You near.   Our fathers’ blood is crying: Who can’st revenge but Thou? And still Thy people is dying, Lord, rise up and save us now.   For we need thy protections In this, our present, fight. Against the world’s subjections O, give us Negroes might. Then when shall come the victory O’er earth, and hellish wrongs, Will cease this earthly worry, We, too, shall join the throngs.
__label__political Fellowmen of Negro blood, With undaunted faith in God, Come along, and take your places With the men of other races. Though we long have trampled been, We a ray of hope have seen. Women, men, and children small, List to Marcus Garvey’s call.   Men of Ethiopia’s race, You are Negroes, ‘tis no disgrace. Let us then united be In our fight for liberty.   U.N.I.A. and A.C.L. Wheresoever man may dwell, Your flag of red, and black, and green High above all shall be seen.   Africa shall win the day Though men and devils be in the way, We are in the fight ‘gainst might. God is with us; all is right.
__label__political Kingdoms wide that sit in darkness Grant them, Lord, Thy glorious light. And from Eastern coast to Western May the morning chase the night--    And redemption Freely purchased win the day. 
__label__political Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake your brown feet, chile, Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake 'em swift and wil'    Get way back, honey,    Do that low-down step.    Walk on over, darling,       Now! Come out       With your left. Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake 'em, honey chile.  Sun's going down this evening-- Might never rise no mo'. The sun's going down this very night Might never rise no mo'-- So dance with swift feet, honey,    (The banjo's sobbing low) Dance with swift feet, honey--    Might never dance no mo'.  Shake your brown feet, Liza, Shake 'em, Liza, chile, Shake your brown feet, Liza,    (The music's soft and wil') Shake your brown feet, Liza,    (The banjo's sobbing low) The sun's going down this very night Might never rise no mo'. 
__label__political I am a Negro:    Black as the night is black,    Black like the depths of my Africa.  I've been a slave:    Caesar told me to keep his door-steps clean .    I brushed the boots of Washington.  I've been a worker:    Under my hand the pyramids arose.    I made mortar for the Woolworth Building.  I've been a singer:    All the way from Africa to Georgia    I carried my sorrow songs.    I made ragtime.  I've been a victim:    The Belgians cut off my hands in the Congo.    They lynch me now in Texas.  I am a Negro:    Black as the night is black,    Black like the depths of my Africa. 
__label__political Well, son, I'll tell you: Life for me ain't been no crystal stair. It's had tacks in it, And splinters, And boards torn up, And places with no carpet on the floor Bare. But all the time I'se been a-climbin' on, And reachin' landin's, And turnin' corners, And sometimes goin' in the dark Where there ain't been no light. So boy, don't you turn back. Don't you set down on the steps 'Cause you finds it's kinder hard . Don't you fall now For I'se still goin', honey, I'se still climbin', And life for me ain't been no crystal stair. 
__label__political Don't knock on my door, little child,    I cannot let you in; You know not what a world this is    Of cruelty and sin. Wait in the still eternity    Until I come to you. The world is cruel, cruel, child,    I cannot let you through.  Don't knock at my heart, little one,    I cannot bear the pain    Of turning deaf ears to your call, Time and time again.    You do not know the monster men Inhabiting the earth,    Be still, be still, my precious child,    I cannot give you birth. 
__label__political We lift a son to you across the day Which bears through travailing, the seed you spread In terror's morning, flung with fingers red In blood of tyrants, who debarred the way To Freedom's dawning. Hearken to the lay Chanted by dusky millions, soft and mellow-keyed In minor measure, Martyr of the Freed, A song of memory across the Day!  Truth cannot perish, though the earth erase The royal emblems, leaving not a trace; And time still burgeoneth the fertile seed Though he is crucified who wrought the deed: O, Alleghanies, fold him to your breast Until the Judgment! Sentinel his rest! 
__label__political Tis a noble gift to be brown, all brown,    Like the strongest things that make up this earth, Like the mountains grave and grand,    Even like the very land,    Even like the trunks of trees--    Even oaks, to be like these! God builds his strength in bronze.  To be brown like thrush and lark!    Like the subtle wren so dark! Nay, the king of beasts wears brown;    Eagles are of this same hue. I thank God, then, I am brown.    Brown has mighty things to do.  
__label__political Rose of the dusk, my musk rose, Perfumed bloom of fire and dream and dew, Singing, I'm bringing the quietude of night to you.  God's hand and my hand Enfold you and hold you close. Repose In His care and my prayer. Fair, you understand?  
__label__political Pour O pour that parting soul in song, O pour it in the sawdust glow of night, Into the velvet pine-smoke air to-night, And let the valley carry it along. And let the valley carry it along.  O land and soil, red soil and sweet-gum tree, So scant of grass, so profligate of pines, Now just before an epoch’s sun declines Thy son, in time, I have returned to thee, Thy son, I have in time returned to thee.  In time, for though the sun is setting on A song-lit race of slaves, it has not set; Though late, O soil, it is not too late yet To catch thy plaintive soul, leaving, soon gone, Leaving, to catch thy plaintive soul soon gone.  O Negro slaves, dark purple ripened plums, Squeezed, and bursting in the pine-wood air, Passing, before they stripped the old tree bare One plum was saved for me, one seed becomes  An everlasting song, a singing tree, Caroling softly souls of slavery, What they were, and what they are to me, Caroling softly souls of slavery.
__label__political I stand in awe and . . . Bow my head in shame That in this land of boasted. Free, nntrampled justice And Christian Rule —so called— Lynching still holds sway!  Oh, ye ! whose blood has . . . Not turned yellow, but — Still runs crimson, as in Mother's sacred womb, Can ye, with inborn conscience Give "unwritten" Lynch Law— room?  I dare say: "No!" No self-respecting mortal Who loves humanity and Submits to white man's "written" laws. Condones such jackal, cut-throat practice, That chokes great Lincoln's aim with . . . "Hyena Claws!"  Yet, notwithstanding all, Our black boys fought like heroes To save this white man's country From an unknown foreign foe. Their noble deeds were heralded by allies In France, in Belgium and in England too.  The beaten foe himself, Feels conscience-bound to honor The black man's valor and his daring deeds ; But Southland . . . Home !—with Houston —    Texas leading. Insults parading heroes on return; Oh, Shame!  What then? Some heart-sick boys resented The unjust treatment meted out to them. When quickly organized a rabble, ready For record-breaking savage cruelty, And hanged the boys that risked their lives for them.  Thirteen souls of colored Martyrs, Freed and gone before their Master, Pleading Justice, Justice only! For their people, who, though black Gave their loved ones to the country; "Colored people do not slack."  God. who calls all men His children. Asking Race or Creed of none, Said, He made us in His Image! Surely! Justice will be done! Southland! Take the "White Voice" warning, Grant it, ere God's Curse has come.
__label__political I want to see the slim palm-trees, Pulling at the clouds With little pointed fingers. . . .  I want to see lithe negro girls, Etched dark against the sky While sunset lingers. I wan to hear the silent sands, Singing to the moon Before the Sphinx-still face. . . .  I want to hear the chanting  Around a heathen fire Of a strange black race. I want to breathe the Lotus flow'r, Sighing to the stars With tendrils drinking at the Nile. . . .  I want to feel the surging  Of my sad people's soul Hidden by a minstrel-smile. 
__label__political O Life --- triumphant Life, thy upward ways Unfold to men of lofty moods, To men who hear, and having heard, Respond full freely to the higher call. As in the primal day of gray-green Earth, When flowers all colorless, and songless birds, And Man --- half brute, Caught color, song and soul-hint From out the realm of Nature's sovereignty,- So for thy richer quality, O Life, Some men have yearned, and yearning, Found it near. O Life --- triumphant Life, thy gleaming heights Are reached by men of vision clear, By men who have keen sense of sound-and sight, Who do not climb to belfry towers Amid the tumult of discordant clang, Nay, rather do they seek a place removed, Where clang and tumult blend ami make The music of the climes. Calm-souled, nor courting human praise, They feel the urge-they hold out helping hands, And upward keep their way. O Life --- triumphant Life, thou art achieved By all who throw off low desire, And from the chrysalis of self Emerge, and rising, aid their kind, Unlike some rare old instrument. Long laid aside-with silent stringslts quality made useless by decay They give their best, they open doors of Hope, They grow to fitness through the commonplace, Until, their souls enriched, they feel The pulse-beats of a new Normality. 
__label__political From death of star to new star's birth,    This ache of limb, this throb of head, This sweaty shop, this smell of earth,    For this we pray, "Give daily bread." Then tenuous with dreams the night,    The feel of soft brown hands in mine, Strength from your lips for one more fight:    Bread's not so dry when dipped in wine.
__label__political Trouncing tyrants and traitors. Hampering henchmen and haters, Erecting enlightenment's empire. Messenger of merit and manliness, Emancipating the enslaved; Symbol of sane salvation; Scorning slavish surrender; Emblazoning economic enlightenment; Nemesis of a nasty nation; Grinding the great and the grovelling; Exacting eternal equality; Rearing the ramparts of reason.
__label__political We run, We run, We cannot stand these shadows! Give us the sun.  We were not made For shade, For heavy shade, And narrow space of stifling air That these white things have made. We run, Oh, God, We run! We must break through these shadows, We must find the sun. 
__label__political Glory! Hallelujah! The dawn's a-comin'! Glory! Hallelujah! The dawn's a-comin'! A black old woman croons in the amen-corner of the Ebecaneezer Baptist Church. A black old woman croons — The dawn's a-comin'!
__label__political The jeweled entrails of pomegranates bled on the marble floor. The jewel-heart of a virgin broke at the golden door. The laughter of a drunken lord hid the sob of a silken whore.  Mene, Wrote a strange hand, Mene Tekel Upharsin,— And Death stood at the door.
__label__political Everywhere In water, air, Thy Spirit is; Rose-faced days Deep in April, With the flaring Purple blaze  Of willows, And maple buds, Pent to bursting, Now unbosom. O sing it, Robin-throated morn! Loud ring it, Lily-bells aborn! Here! Everywhere! Joyous Easter! Thou hast come Plain to see; With Life for some, But Truth for me.  
__label__political Grant old Egypt dead, what words shall thank thee For the tenuous touch that carved the portion, And wrought apart the place unchanging That marks the dark man's challenge From the ancient world of art?  That winged sun has wended through the ages, And known its shape on silk and blinding page; Been inset with the gems of burning jewels By artisans who swing again th disk On wings outspread, which sweep e'en centuries by!  Signet of Ra that the swart Pharoahs singled, Sons of the sun, When time and the russet mummy are lost in abyss, And symbols and sun disk shall no longer bind death By mystical strands to the cycles of earth,  That wisdom supernal which made wise the Pharoahs, Will judge generations more knowing than they, Which bury themselves deep in His Life Eternal, That fain would fold races in Infinity. 
__label__political Most things are colorful things—the sky, earth, and sea.                  Black men are most men; but the white are free! White things are rare things; so rare, so rare They stole from out a silvered world—somewhere. Finding earth-plains fair plains, save greenly grassed, They strewed white feathers of cowardice, as they passed;                  The golden stars with lances fine                  The hills all red and darkened pine, They blanched with their wand of power; And turned the blood in a ruby rose To a poor white poppy-flower.  They pyred a race of black, black men,  And burned them to ashes white; then Laughing, a young one claimed a skull. For the skull of a black is white, not dull,                   But a glistening awful thing;                  Made it seems, for this ghoul to swing In the face of God with all his might, And swear by the hell that siréd him:                  "Man-maker, make white!" 
__label__political Oh! you children of a despised race Of dark and saffron hue; Stop building mansions in the sky To be occupied by you.  Your quest should be for mansions here, For self, for home, for race, That you can give posterity That high and fitting place.  Placid content is a fool's paradise It unfits the mind. Face facts, bold and courageously, Be implacable; the resolute kind.  Never submerge your manhood, Always resent insults, If anyone regard you highly Such methods they repulse.  Be a bulldog in the fight Never be a cur, The bulldog no one ever kicks, Instinctively they fear.  The fight is on! The enemy is here; Would you know how to beat 'em? The solution is plain, a cogent fact, Join the Friends of Negro Freedom.
__label__political Thou art not dead, although the spoiler's hand Lies heavy as death upon thee; though the wrath Of its accursed might is in thy path And has usurped thy children of their land; Though yet the scourges of a monstrous hand Roam on your ruined fields, your trampled lanes, Your ravaged homes and desolated fanes; Thou are not dead, but sleeping,-- Motherland. A mighty country, valorous and free, Thou shalt outlive this terror and this pain; Shall call thy scattered children back to thee, Strong with the memory of their brothers slain; And rise from out thy charnel house to be Thine own immortal, brilliant self again! 
__label__political "They jest at scars who never felt a wound," They speak of love who never sensed the "thrill," They grind out verse, who'se lyre was ne'er attuned, To meet the edict of the pop'lar will.  They dream of wealth and fame on heights sublime, Although in truth, they never had amount, Or held in trust, the item of a dime To swell the coffers of a bank-account.  They babble war, who never held a gun. They talk of thrift who never saved a cent; They shout: "Fair Play," but make a good safe run, When ranging landlords come to get their rent.  They want good service, 'though they never gave, The eager, willing bell-hop lugging bags, A thin and lonely dime, his soul to save, Or starved street-beggars in their tattered rags.  They play at stocks, and in a sprawling hand, They write out checks, who'se funds have long been nil, At last, the Boss gets "hep" and out they land ; Because they cannot pay their hotel-bill.  They boast of fights who never graced a glove, They picture goals, they think they will attain, They dream not dreams, and do not know whereof They build these fairy castles in their brain.  They prate of Peace who never strove to be Staunch guardians of the Brotherhood of Man; They shout aloud, for "World Democracy!" But brand with shame each universal plan.  They daily wail of wrongs beyond the sea, While here, defenceless Negroes writhe and burn; Great GodI What will the awful tribute be, That day when Black Men get their just return?
__label__political As gleams the evening star Upon the brow of night, When light of day has trailed Its master's sudden flight, So shines the motherland-- An emerald at rest, Amid the sapphire splendor Of the ocean's surging breast.  
__label__political I have found thee in the soft shadows of twilight When the stars blink sleepily At the glowing, defiant Sun-King Who sinks slowly, reluctantly Behind the craggy hill tops. I have heard thee in the still Silence of early morning When the new day creeps stealthily Out of oblivion, to gaze on Black spires, snorting smoke-stacks Bent and tired workers.
__label__political Streams of them pour out incessantly From dismal hovels; Blank expressioned, mutely pleading For strength to bear their weazened frames Forth to their prisons and back to their huts : But they are drones, only drones— So it matters not.
__label__political The trees are sighing and swaying In mournful rhythm To the moaning melodies Of the comfortless wind. Low and uncertain their dirge continues In awful persistence For those who are dying tonight.
__label__political A rainy day is an eerie day When elfins skip blithely o'er puddles and pools, But mere human folk plod sulkily Wishing for sunny days When the rust's off the tools.
__label__political Not for myself I make this prayer,    But for this race of mine That stretches forth from shadowed places    Dark hands for bread and wine. For me, my heart is pagan mad,    My feet are never still, But give them hearths to keep them warm    In homes high on a hill. For me, my faith lies fallowing,    I bow not till I see, But these are humble and believe;    Bless their credulity. For me, I pay my debts in kind,    And see no better way, Bless these who turn the other cheek    For love of you, and pray. Our Father, God, our Brother, Christ    So are we taught to pray; Their kinship seems a little thing    Who sorrow all the day. Our Father, God; our Brother, Christ,    Or are we bastard kin, That to our plaints your ears are closed,    Your doors barred from within? Our Father, God; our Brother, Christ,    Retrieve my race again; So shall you compass this black sheep,    This pagan heart. Amen.
__label__political You have not heard my love's dark throat,    Slow-fluting like a reed, Release the perfect golden note    She caged there for my need. Her walk is like the replica    Of some barbaric dance Wherein the soul of Africa    Is winged with arrogance. And yet so light she steps across    The ways her sure feet pass, She does not dent the smoothest moss    Or bend the thinnest grass. My love is dark as yours is fair,    Yet lovelier I hold her Than listless maids with pallid hair,    And blood that's thin and colder. You-proud-and-to-be-pitied one,    Gaze on her and despair; Then seal your lips until the sun    Discovers one as fair.
__label__political Child of the Night am I- Night's sable son; When the elf-children came,    Lo! I was one.  Darkness was over me when I was born, I court the night-spirits and scoff at the morn, Rainbows of midnight my features adorn.    At the great forge of Time,    Making men's souls sublime,    I stood arrayed in Night    Ere light was born.     Poised on the wings of Night,       Upward I glide,    Flouting the flings of light,       Proudly I ride.  I rest on the pillows of thunderous clouds, Arrayed in the billows of wondrous shrouds, I whip up the lightnings and mock the pale crowds.     At the great forge of Time,    Making men's souls sublime,    I stood arrayed in Night       Ere light was born.    Blessing the sable sons,       Lifting their shroud,    Pressing less able ones,       Purging the proud.  I daub them with ebony, smother their pride, I swab them with smoke and their vanity chide. Is the soul of a man in the hue of his hide?     At the great forge of Time    Making men's souls sublime,    I stood arrayed in Night       Ere light was born.    Child of the dusky veil,       Kissed by the Sun,    Girded in trusty mail,       Truth bids me on.  Cloud me in battle smoke, night-shrouds attend me, The beginning was blackness and so will the end be; Black God and black angels, surround and defend me!     At the great forge of Time,    Making men's souls sublime,    I stood arrayed in Night       Ere light was born. 
__label__political Because my face is brown    They say I may not dream Of triumph and renown.    What know they of life's scheme? Ah, bend, bend far the bow—    The arrow farther flies. Press down my soul and, lo,    My dreams shall range the skies.
__label__political The Song of Psyche  Hark this message I bring, in this carol I sing, From a song that I heard in the park. 'Twasn't trammelled in word, for it came from a bird; 'Twas divined from the notes of a lark  Dreams Are the Workman's Friends  Dreams are the workman's friends. Their rapture can Awake his spirits better than old wines ; To 'waken him to beauty is their plan; They bring him rubies from remote confines.    Dreams are the workman's friends.  I daily hang my latchstrings out of doors For them. They throw conditions to the winds. They find me lighting lamps or tinting floors; And yet they greet me like old-fashioned friends.    Dreams are the workman's friends.  Forsooth, the elves of limbo leave my camp, They jostle in confusion in retreat. My rapture drives them onward like a lamp Drives on the dark before the pilgrim's feet.    Dreams are the workman's friends.  They bring me mingled rapture o'er the crest, That once behind horizons hid away. Their gift of rapture burns within my breast Like twilight beams that love the dying day.    Dreams are the workman's friends.   My Motive  Should you who listen to my flute Conclude 'twere best if I were mute, Or should you doubt that I have won The wreath of praise, the glad "well done"; If you some better verse have read, My soul would still be comforted :— For though I limitations feel. Love, strangling judgment, made me kneel, — Constrained by reverence, not conceit — To vent my soul at Beauty's feet.
__label__political To fling my arms wide In some place of the sun, To whirl and to dance Till the white day is done. Then rest at cool evening Beneath a tall tree While night comes on gently,       Dark like me,---- That is my dream!  To fling my arms wide In the face of the sun, Dance! whirl! whirl! Till the quick day is done. Rest at pale evening. . . . A tall, slim tree. . . . Night coming tenderly       Black like me.
__label__political I do not hate you, For your faces are beautiful, too. I do not hate you, Your faces are whirling lights of loveliness and splendor, too. Yet why do you torture me, O, white strong ones, Why do you torture me?
__label__political We are related--you and I. You from the West Indies, I from Kentucky. We are related--you and I. You from Africa, I from these States. We are brothers--you and I.
__label__political Her teeth are as white as the meat of an apple, Her lips are like dark ripe plums. I love her. Her hair is a midnight mass, a dusky aurora. I love her. And because her skin is the brown of an oak leaf in autumn, but a softer color, I want to kiss her. 
__label__political The ivory gods, And the ebony gods, And the gods of diamond and jade, Sit silently on their temple shelves While the people Are afraid. Yet the ivory gods, And the ebony gods, And the gods of diamond-jade, Are only silly puppet gods That the people themselves Have made. 
__label__political Stronger than man-made bars, the chain, that round your life's arean, Deeper than hell the anchor sweeps That stills your young desires; Darker than night the inward look That meditation offers, Redder than blood the future years Roll down the hills of torture! But ah! you were not made for this, And life is but preluding-- The major theme shall hold its sway When full awake, not dreaming, Your ebon foot shall press the sod Where immortelles are blooming; Beyond the glaze of fevered years I see--THE DAY IS COMING! 
__label__political O what a privilege to be— Breath of The Breath Eternal ; To have the life, To have the strife Of that dark mystery A son of Africa, whose blood Holds nations all in fee, Commanding by one sultry drop The whole identity; She whispers at the gate of birth And lo! the rainbow on the earth.
__label__political We are the Messenger, Our message brings you cheer ; Faint not, the goal's in sight, Your Victory is near. Our message brings you hope, The blue is in your skies, Take courage, Ethiopia's Sons, Your star is yet to rise. Our message brings you Joy, Forget the bitter sorrow Of Slavery's taint of yesterday, For Lo! There is-Tomorrow. Our message comes in answer To "Their" call of long ago, For Freedom and Intelligence, To down the wicked foe. Our message is your reaping, Oppression's sway must cease. Intelligence is our passport To Equal rights and peace. 
__label__political Hark! 'tis the whispering pine trees, They sigh as the pine burrs fall, List! To the woodland echo, The first young robin's call. List! To the murmuring waters, To the tide as it comes and goes; There is rest in the sacred silence, Where the rippling water flows. Go find a spot in the forest, Covered with Nature's green sod ; Hark! Mother Earth gently whispers "Man is Himself and his God!"
__label__political Ye sons of freedom, up, to battle! We go to war against the wrong; No longer we th' oppressor's cattle, We rise as men, ten million strong I We rise as men, ten million strong! Shall cowards kill and burn our mothers, Make bastard-orphans of the young, And then with threats bestill our tongue, While life is in our bodies, brothers?  Refrain: Up, up, ye men of bronze! Breathe now a freeman's breath! And claim your liberty in life Or freedom in your death!  With wealth and power the tryants fight us With laws and mobs and bolts and bars, But, up! let not these things affright us! We fight with God and with the stars ! We fight with God and with the stars ! Our pathway may be long and gory— Precious is freedom, high the price, Bought ever at a sacrifice— But at the end we gain the glory!  With ignorance they shall not bind us, We claim the freedom of the school ; With sophistries they shall not blind us, We will be men and no man's tool! We will be men and no man's tool! We ask not pity, O oppressor, Justice alone is our demand, The right to use our brain and hand, The right to be our soul's possessor!  We fight the fight of all the ages, And walk the path of all the just; We hear the voice of all the sages : We will be free if die we must! We will be free if die we must! No tyrant's torch or gun shall turn us, We fight for mothers, babes and wives, We die for these, our dearer lives, Though the oppressor shoot and burn us! O Freedom! let thy spirit charm us!  Let us not heed the coward's fear : The hand of death can never harm us, For freedom is than life more dear! For* freedom is than life more dear! Jehovah, God of all the races, Sustain our heart, accept our soul,— From everywhere to freedom's goal, Millions of Black Men, turn your faces!
__label__political Who sees God as "white" Sees God not at all ; 'Twixt they and He Self reareth a wall. God is hrown : He is white, Black, yellow and red. God of creeds, color, castes ! That God is long dead. Is God "silent"? Then is man dumb. Does man "carry a cross" ? His time is not come. God speaks as man speaks : He tries as men try. God is not alone "God." He is you and I.
__label__political Long ere your winged caravels grand Touched my sunny Afric strand, Bringing Bibles, beads and rum. Enslaved my body, left me dumb--  Long ere your learned Nordic sires Harnessed heaven's flashing fires, Imprisoned them in copper wires And bade them do their hearts' desires--  Ere your thoughts flashed with speed of light Through realms of universal night-- Ere telegraph or radio Connected Capetown with Cairo--  I communed from place to place With all the sons of Afric race; O'er desert silence, jungle hum-- I conquered distance with my drum.  
__label__political This is the same moon that shone down upon the head of Jesus praying in the hushed solitudes of the hills in Galilee. This is the same moon that looked down in pale amazement at the great betrayal in the garden of Gethesemane. This moon knew Jesus of Nazareth. How else the miracle of healing In the cool white fingers of moon-light That transfigures with a loveliness These mean streets and huddled houses of night Into something touched with holiness? How else the miracle of peace In the quiet hands of moon-light That so softly lie upon my tired eyes And restless heart? O now I know How the gentle hands of Jesus Soothed the maimed bodies and weary hearts Of those of long ago. This moon knew Jesus of Nazareth.
__label__political God give the yellow man An easy breeze at blossom time. Grant his eager, slanting eyes to cover Every land and dream  Of Afterwhile. God give blue-eyed men their swivel chairs To whirl in tall buildings, Allow them many ships at sea, And on land, soldiers And policemen. For black man, God, no need To bother much, But only fill afresh his meed Of laughter, His cup of tears. god suffer little men The taste of soul's desire. 
__label__political With satin skin and body bare, they beat the air with drum; They sang a weird, uncanny song that seemed to strike them numb; Full passionate their bodies beat to time not elsewhere heard— A melody of wind and rain and gentle song of bird.     When hawk and eagle fly by night,    There shines on each the same moon’s light.  With satin skin and body bare they danced to sun and star, They stalked the mighty game to lair, and drew men near and far; With milky skin and body decked a people came to see What made the satin bare-skinned men so happy and so free.     When hawk and eagle search by day,    They seek, forsooth, the self-same prey.  The simple truth they failed to see, it lay before their eyes: The men with satin skins were kings; they wore no motley dyes; They reached their goal on sweeping wings—such wings as eagles fly. The nightingale no longer sings when hawks go sailing by.     O eagle, spread your wings tonight;    Let not the hawk get out of sight.  The milky skins took bodies bare across the ocean wide; They made them slaves to their command, their souls they could not guide. All day the slaves worked in the sun, to till the soil their task, They suffered all that humans could and wore a smiling mask.     The eagle soars high in the air;    It holds a place no hawk will dare.  With nothing they could call their own, no earthly prize to win, Their hidden souls were theirs alone,—a holiness within; They held their heads as eagles do and looked into the sky. The hawks made circles in the air and with great pride flew by.     O hawk, fold up your wings tonight.    The eagle’s flown far from your sight.  Crusader, you of our own time, who proved to all the world That red and blue and white are strong when in ene emblem furled; Crusader, true, of our own time, who left a country fair, You turned a Son to your own clime—a Son with kingly air. For, radiant in your consciousness beneath your carriage bold, There shone your heritage of strength—a gift that eagles hold. 
__label__political God is an Indian--He loves gay color so . . .  Red, yellow, purple, oranges and blue Are in the sky at sunset; at the sunrise, too. God is Irish--He likes green color best. All the trees and grasses in green garments oft-times dress. God is Saxon, stern and cold.  For snow is white and ice is cold. The downy clouds are white. And a  White moon peeks; when lovers pledge their truth. Cotton is white and snowy lambkin's fleece.  God is African--for night is robed in black. The twinkling stars are black men's eyes.  The black clouds, tempests tell. While little seeds of flowers birthed are Tans and brown and black. . . .  
__label__political Along the shore the tall, thin grass    That fringes that dark river, While sinuously soft feet pass,    Begins to bleed and quiver.  The great dark voice breaks with a sob    Across the womb of night; Above your grave the tom-toms throb,    And the hills are weird with light.  The great dark heart is like a well    Drained bitter by the sky, And all the honeyed lies they tell    Come there to thirst and die.  No lie is strong enough to kill    The roots that work below; From your rich dust and slaughtered will    A tree with tongues will grow.
__label__political What is Africa to me: Copper sun or scarlet sea,  Jungle star or jungle track, Strong bronzed men, or regal black Women from whose loins I sprang When the birds of Eden sang? One three centuries removed From the scenes his fathers loved, Spicy grove, cinnamon tree, What is Africa to me? So I lie, who all day long Want no sound except the song Sung by wild barbaric birds Goading massive jungle herds, Juggernauts of flesh that pass Trampling tall defiant grass Where young forest lovers lie, Plighting troth beneath the sky. So I lie, who always hear, Though I cram against my ear Both my thumbs, and keep them there, Great drums throbbing through the air. So I lie, whose fount of pride, Dear distress, and joy allied , Is my somber flesh and skin, With the dark blood dammed within Like great pulsing tides of wine That, I fear, must burst the fine Channels of the chafing net Where they surge and foam and fret. Africa? A book one thumbs Listlessly, till slumber comes. Unremembered are her bats Circling through the night, her cats Crouching in the river reeds, Stalking gentle flesh that feeds By the river brink ; no more Does the bugle- throated roar Cry that monarch claws have leapt From the scabbards where they slept. Silver snakes that once a year Doff the lovely coats you wear, Seek no covert in your fear Lest a mortal eye should see; What's your nakedness to me? Here no leprous flowers rear Fierce corollas in the air; Here no bodies sleek and wet, Dripping mingled rain and sweat, Tread the savage measures of Jungle boys and girls in love. What is last year's snow to me, Last year's anything? The tree Budding yearly must forget How its past arose or set-- Bough and blossom, flower, fruit, Even what shy bird with mute Wonder at her travail there, Meekly labored in its hair. One three centuries removed From the scenes his fathers loved, Spicy grove, cinnamon tree, What is Africa to me? So I lie, who find no peace Night or day, no slight release From the unremittant beat Made by cruel padded feet Walking through my body's street. Up and down they go, and back, Treading out a jungle track. So I lie, who never quite Safely sleep from rain at night I can never rest at all When the rain begins to fall; Like a soul gone mad with pain I must match its weird refrain; Ever must I twist and squirm, Writhing like a baited worm , While its primal measures drip Through my body, crying, "Strip! Doff this new exuberance. Come and dance the Lover's Dance!" In an old remembered way Rain works on me night and day. Quaint, outlandish heathen gods Black men fashion out of rods, Clay, and brittle bits of stone, In a likeness like their own, My conversion came high-priced; I belong to Jesus Christ, Preacher of humility; Heathen gods are naught to me. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, So I make an idle boast; Jesus of the twice-turned cheek, Lamb of God, although I speak With my mouth thus, in my heart Do I play a double part. Ever at Thy glowing altar sick and falter, Wishing He I served were black, Thinking then it would not lack Precedent of pain to guide it, Must my heart grow Let who would or might deride it; Surely then this flesh would know Yours had borne a kindred woe. Lord, I fashion dark gods, too, Daring even to give You Dark despairing features where, Crowned with dark rebellious hair, Patience wavers just so much as Mortal grief compels, while touches Quick and hot, of anger, rise To smitten cheek and weary eyes. Lord, forgive me if my need Sometimes shapes a human creed. All day long and all night through, One thing only must I do: Quench my pride and cool my blood, Lest I perish in the flood. Lest a hidden ember set Timber that I thought was wet Burning like the dryest flax, Melting like the merest wax, Lest the grave restore its dead. Not yet has my heart or head In the least way realized They and I are civilized.
__label__political “And what would I do in heaven, pray,    Me with my dancing feet, And limbs like apple boughs that sway    When the gusty rain winds beat? And how would I thrive in a perfect place    Where dancing would be sin, With not a man to love my face,    Nor an arm to hold me in? The seraphs and the cherubim    Would be too proud to bend To sing the faery tunes that brim    My heart from end to end. The wistful angels down in hell    Will smile to see my face, And understand, because they fell    From that all-perfect place.”
__label__political Locked arm in arm they cross the way,    The black boy and the white, The golden splendor of the day,    The sable pride of night. From lowered blinds the dark folk stare,    And here the fair folk talk, Indignant that these two should dare    In unison to walk. Oblivious to look and word    They pass, and see no wonder That lightning brilliant as a sword    Should blaze the path of thunder.
__label__political What if his glance is bold and free,    His mouth the lash of whips? So should the eyes of lovers be,    And so a lover's lips. What if no puritanic strain    Confines him to the nice? He will not pass this way again,    Nor hunger for you twice. Since in the end consort together    Magdalen and Mary, Youth is the time for careless weather:    Later, lass, be wary.
__label__political That brown girl's swagger gives a twitch    To beauty like a queen; Lad, never dam your body's itch    When loveliness is seen. For there is ample room for bliss    In pride in clean, brown limbs, And lips know better how to kiss    Than how to raise white hymns. And when your body's death gives birth    To soil for spring to crown, Men will not ask if that rare earth    Was white flesh once, or brown.
__label__political Three hundred years ago there was a land    And two who moved With one fair thought: meet hand in hand,    And to be loved. Then came a ship and strange, pale men    Who gave me drink That made me sleep; I woke -- and then --     The broken link. I am nost sure that you were moved   At all, or wept; For you were young and much beloved --    Perhaps you slept. But there was blood, and sweat, and hell,    And tears for me, Till one whose voice was like a bell    Said, 'Go, be free!' The chains were off, but other things    Still held me slave: A stretch of land where gray sand clings    To a warm white wave. But more than this, there was yoru face,    Beautiful and wise-- Oh, I have sought them every place,    Your face and eyes. Three hundred years ago, and yet     A day ago; There still the red suns flare and set,    The dark winds blow.  
__label__political I have just seen a most beautiful thing Slim and still, Against a gold, gold sky, A straight black cypress, Sensitive, Exquisite, A black finger Pointing upwards. Why, beautiful still finger, are you black? And why are you pointing upwards?
__label__political Lovely, dark, and lonely one, Bare your bosom to the sun, Do not be afraid of light You who are a child of night.  Open wide your arms to life, Whirl in the wind of pain and strife, Face the wall with the dark closed gate, Beat with bare, brown fists And wait.
__label__political It’s an earth song,— And I’ve been waiting long for an earth song. It’s a spring song,— And I’ve been waiting long for a spring song.    Strong as the shoots of a new plant    Strong as the bursting of new buds    Strong as the coming of the first child from its mother’s womb. It’s an earth song, A body-song, A spring song, I have been waiting long for this spring song.
__label__political I, too, sing America.  I am the darker brother. They send me to eat in the kitchen When company comes, But I laugh, And eat well,  And grow strong.  Tomorrow,  I'll sit at the table When company comes. Nobody'll dare Say to me, 'Eat in the kitchen,' then.   Besides, They'll see how beautiful I am And be ashamed,--  I, too, am America. 
__label__political We have to-morrow Bright before us Like a flame  Yesterday, a night-gone thing A sun-down name And dawn to-day  Broad arch above the road we came, We march!
__label__political My old man's a white old man And my old mother's black. If ever I cursed my white old man I take my curses back.  If ever I cursed my black old mother And wished she were in hell, I'm sorry for that evil wish And now I wish her well.  My old man died in a fine big house. My ma died in a shack. I wonder where I'm gonna die, Being neither white nor black? 
__label__political Ah, My black one, Thou art not beautiful Yet thou hast A loveliness Surpassing beauty.  Oh, My black one, Thou art not good Yet thou hast A purity Surpassing goodness.  Ah, My black one, Thou art not luminous Yet an altar of jewels, An altar of shimmering jewels, Would pale in the light Of thy darkness, Pale in the light Of thy nightness. 
__label__political "Me an' ma baby's Got two mo' ways, Two mo' ways to do de buck!    Da, da,    Da, da, da! Two mo' ways to do de buck!"  Soft light on the tables, Music gay, Brown-skin steppers In a cabaret.  White folks, laugh! White folks, pray!  “Me an' ma baby's Got two mo' ways, Two mo' ways to do de buck!" 
__label__political In the Johannesburg Mines There are 240,000  Native Africans working. What kind of poem Would you  Make out of that? 240,000 natives Working in the  Johannesburg mines. 
__label__political The mills  That grind and grind, That grind out new steel And grind away the lives  Of men,-- In the sunset Their stacks Are great black silhouettes Againset the sky. In the dawn They belch red fire. The mills,-- Grinding out new steel, Old men.
__label__political Oh, wash-woman, Arms elbow-deep in white suds, Soul washed clean, Clothes washed clean,— I have many songs to sing you Could I but find the words. Was it four o'clock or six o'clock on a winter afternoon, I saw you wringing out the last shirt in Miss White Lady's kitchen? Was it four o'clock or six o'clock? I don't remember. But I know, at seven one spring morning you were on Vermont Street with a bundle in your arms going to wash clothes. And I know I've seen you in a New York subway train in the late afternoon coming home from washing clothes. Yes, I know you, wash-woman. I know how you send your children to school, and high-school, and even college. I know how you work and help your man when times are hard. I know how you build your house up from the wash-tub and call it home. And how you raise your churches from white suds for the service of the Holy God. And I've seen you singing, wash-woman. Out in the backyard garden under the apple trees, singing, hanging white clothes on long lines in the sun-shine. And I've seen you in church a Sunday morning singing, praising your Jesus, because some day you're going to sit on the right hand of the Son of God and forget you ever were a wash-woman. And the aching back and the bundles of clothes will be unremembered then. Yes, I've seen you singing. And for you,    O singing wash-woman,    For you, singing little brown woman,    Singing strong black woman,    Singing tall yellow woman,    Arms deep in white suds,    Soul clean,    Clothes clean,—    For you I have many songs to make    Could I but find the words.
__label__political Because my mouth  Is wide with laughter And my throat Is deep with song, You do not think  I suffer after  I have held my pain  So long.   Because my mouth  Is wide with laughter,  You do not hear My inner cry,  Because my feet  Are gay with dancing,  You do not know  I die.  
__label__political It is we who are liars: The Pretenders-to-be who are not And the Pretenders-not-to-be who are. It is we who use words As screens for thoughts And weave dark garments To cover the naked body Of the too white Truth. It is we with the civilized souls    Who are liars. 
__label__political Little dark baby, Little Jew baby, Little outcast, America is seeking the stars, America is seeking tomorrow. You are America. I am America America—the dream, America—the vision. America—the star-seeking I. Out of yesterday The chains of slavery; Out of yesterday, The ghettos of Europe; Out of yesterday, The poverty and pain of the old, old world, The building and struggle of this new one, We come You and I, Seeking the stars. You and I, You of the blue eyes And the blond hair, I of the dark eyes And the crinkly hair. You and I Offering hands Being brothers, Being one, Being America. You and I. And I? Who am I? You know me: I am Crispus Attucks at the Boston Tea Party; Jimmy Jones in the ranks of the last black troops marching for democracy. I am Sojourner Truth preaching and praying for the goodness of this wide, wide land; Today's black mother bearing tomorrow's America. Who am I? You know me, Dream of my dreams, I am America. I am America seeking the stars. America— Hoping, praying Fighting, dreaming. Knowing There are stains On the beauty of my democracy, I want to be clean. I want to grovel No longer in the mire. I want to reach always After stars. Who am I? I am the ghetto child, I am the dark baby, I am you And the blond tomorrow And yet I am my one sole self, America seeking the stars.
__label__political Something has died when the lily lifts The shaft of its God-turned head, Something has faded and perished that now Lies under the lily's door dead.  Something has died when the heart exhales Its attar of roses rare; Bow at the tomb when the soul leaps forth A flame on the midnight air! 
__label__political Ho! my Brother, Pass me not by so scornfully, I'm doing this lviing of being black, Perhaps I bear your own life-pack; And heavy, heavy is the load That bends my body to the road. But, I have kept a smile for Fate, I neither cry, nor cringe, nor hate; Intrepidly I strive to bear This handicap: the planets wear  The Maker's imprint, and with mine I swing into this rhythmic line, In this guise was I made a man-- The world to conquer-- and I can. So I go forward fearlessly To LIFE through DEATH, On Calvary!
__label__political Ah my race, Hungry race, Throbbing and young — Ah, my race, Wonder race, Sobbing with song, Ah, my race, Careless in mirth Ah, my veiled race, Fumbling in birth.
__label__political The Pullman porters need a raise, Yes, siree! These men behind it deserve praise, Take it from me, Everyone should fall in line, Boost the movement, Yell it's fine! More money for them Pullman boys All along the line. They scare make a living wage As things stand. A raise, regardless of the age We now demand. These are a loyal bunch of men, They serve us all now and then, So yell, 'More pay,' Yell it again For the Pullman men.
__label__political The surge of life in volumes onward rides,  Sweeping the margin of eternity; And as a ripple on the brooding tides My life, a-dream, shapes its sure destiny. Like constant showes of torrential rain The surging, racial currents force the stream Whose grappling groundswells shake the solid main Within the gaze of star and sunlight gleam With prayers and moans their mingled accents rise From shoal and reef, from harbor, bar and bay; They rush the surfs to gain some glittering prize Till in the misty void they melt away, Like vapors rising from a boiling sea Into the ocean of eternity. 
__label__political Far down, down through the city’s great, gaunt gut The gray train rushing bears the weary wind; In the packed cars the fans the crowd’s breath cut, Leaving the sick and heavy air behind. And pale-cheeked children seek the upper door To give their summer jackets to the breeze; Their laugh is swallowed in the deafening roar Of captive wind that moans for fields and seas; Seas cooling warm where native schooners drift Through sleepy waters, while gulls wheel and sweep, Waiting for windy waves the keels to lift Lightly among the islands of the deep; Islands of lofty palm trees blooming white That lend their perfume to the tropic sea, Where fields lie idle in the dew drenched night, And the Trades float above them fresh and free.
__label__political Your door is shut against my tightened face, And I am sharp as steel with discontent; But I possess the courage and the grace To bear my anger proudly and unbent. The pavement slabs burn loose beneath my feet, A chafing savage, down the decent street, And passion rends my vitals as I pass, Where boldly shines your shuttered door of glass. Oh I must search for wisdom every hour, Deep in my wrathful bosom sore and raw, And find in it the superhuman power To hold me to the letter of your law! Oh I must keep my heart inviolate Against the potent poison of your hate.
__label__political Bow down my soul in worship very low And in the holy silences be lost. Bow down before the marble man of woe, Bow down before the singing angel host. What jewelled glory fills my spirit’s eye! What golden grandeur moves the depths of me! The soaring arches lift me up on high Taking my breath with their rare symmetry. Bow down my soul and let the wondrous light Of Beauty bathe thee from her lofty throne Bow down before the wonder of man’s might. Bow down in worship, humble and alone; Bow lowly down before the sacred sight Of man’s divinity alive in stone.
__label__political Bananas ripe and green, and ginger-root, Cocoa in pods and alligator pears, And tangerines and mangoes and grape fruit, Fit for the highest prize at parish fairs, Set in the window, bringing memories Of fruit-trees laden by low-singing rills, And dewy dawns, and mystical blue skies In benediction over nun-like hills. My eyes grew dim, and I could no more gaze; A wave of longing through my body swept, And, hungry for the old, familiar ways, I turned aside and bowed my head and wept.
__label__political No wish for doing evil and no thought Of doing good. The heart has wilful thirst And oft times longs for drink that may come to naught. Life is the flight which none of men have sought And is an urge so shadowed that we durst Not learn in its measure lest we stand accursed In the great Presence of the Holy Gift we've sought. Brother I hear you say, “It glowed in Thrace And where proud Thebes held Africa’s great soul Aloft a light forever rich and whole In glory, beauty and the pride of race.” But life is all for all, ’tis but the breath Of seeming, the enhungered wish of death.
__label__political Green holly has a lovely leaf to make the Christmas bright, Green cedar gives a spicy smell On Christmas eve at night. Green candles wear a joyous look, Each with its golden light.    Good holly, cedars,    Candles gay!    Come Christmas sprite!    Come Christmas fay! You've never known a brighter day For joining childhood in its play! 
__label__political Silhouette   On the face of the moon  Am I.  A dark shadow in the light.   A silhouette am I  One the face of the moon Lacking color  Or vivid brightness  But defined all the clearer  Because  I am dark,  Black on the face of the moon.   A shadow am I Growing in the light,  Not understood  As is the day, But more easily seen  Because  I am a shadow in the light.  
__label__political I think That God must be A Music-Master Who directs the play, And we the players in His Orchestra, Make harmonies or discords As He wills -- -- --  He crookes His little finger And the chords  Come swelling from the instruments we hold Within our eager hands. He nods His head And majesty sublime comes crashing forth, Or, with a simple drop of his baton, Makes silent all the quivering, dancing strings We play upon -- -- -- Mere puppets? yes, but who would not be proud  To be a player in a symphony  So mighty? And to be directed by The Hand of such an Artist?
__label__political I have no quarrel with those who claim There is no God; who idly boast That man has come from things akin To apes; who point with pride And proof to family trees whereon Sit chattering all their simian ancestry! I need but lift mine eyes and see The Night slide down in velvet blackness O'er a sky that late was crimson dyed With Sun's own life-blood! Or to hearken to The young Day's whispered murmur as she stirs And, in her naked glory rising up, wipes the stardust From her drowsy eyes, the while her pearl-grey couch Takes fire and melts before the glow of her new suitor's smile! These be sufficient proofs for me to know There is a God! And as for ancestry-- What ape could see the wonder of the Night  As I have seen it? And what monkey-soul  Could catch the murmur of a waking world  And in it hear the voice of God proclaim  His glories? 
__label__political Mr. John, listen to me: Don't pull any foolish stunt. And don't make another move. Just keep your hand closed up tight. Nothing you think of doing Can ever make me afraid — Fear died in me long ago. You may live in the Big House And own all the land in sight: But you can't get me, unless, You come across as I bid. And hear all I have to say. You and I are related — You don't like that do you? Well, its true, nevertheless. It doesn't matter to me. Now that I see things clearly. Great-grandmother, a victim With all the rest of her tribe. Paying the price of slavery Down thru the generations. Wasn't I just a love-child. Killing my mother at birth? Then grandmother did washings To send me to school to learn. To learn that I have freedom And I belong to myself! Now, you're standing there begging. Willing to eat from my hand: Before, you offered a coin. Thinking I'd jump at the chance. Some poor devils would, maybe. Black-white-red-vellow or brown. Skin doesn't matter, really. When a man gets excited. I know you, you White-Blackguard! You low "Yaller Gal" Coward! You're wild about my color. I can see it in your eyes. You've forgotten your woman. Alone there in the Big House — A wife has a thankless part— Why, she'll love vou for nothing. And be happy at the tho't. But no, you are'nt satisfied. You want everything you see : And sometimes you crave blindly For the very soul of me. When you were a little boy They whipped you on mv account : I wept my aching heart out While you bore it like a man And came bringing me candy As soon as you stole away. Now, you're grown up and vou come With that pitiful "two-bits" — Thinking I'll fall, you cheap-skate! Well, you've got me dead wrong, see? Oh, I'm for sale allright, sure : But its at my price, not yours. I'll not give myself away. I'll sell you my stock in trade— Its the oldest in the world. You can buy me, yes indeed. Only let me tell vou this: Man, you've got to have dollars With that quarter to get mel
__label__political Black Glory dead! Black Glory dead! And Ethiopia is no more, Who from her earthly garden's bed Her golden fruits of glory bore! Ah! she was trampled by her foes, They trampled her with fruits and seeds, Beneath the garden's bed where rose Her power now overgrown with weeds. Ye who're of her posterities Till, till the bed where she has lain; And from her seeds a thousand trees Shall rise to Ethiope again!
__label__political Lady, Lady, I saw your face, Dark as night withholding a star . . . The chisel fell, or it might have been You had borne so long the yoke of men. Lady, Lady, I saw your hands, Twisted, awry, like crumpled roots, Bleached poor white in a sudsy tub, Wrinkled and drawn from your rub-a-dub. Lady, Lady, I saw your heart, And altared there in its darksome place Were the tongues of flame the ancients knew, Where the good God sits to spangle through.
__label__political Little brown feet that toss in air,    Double rosebuds on a stem, Hard and scorching is the way    Like the road from Bethlehem Leading to the requiem.  Little brown eyes so innocent,    Shining with a starry light, Must life's lurid, hateful glare    Hurt them, dim their cheerful sight, Take the day and give them night!  Little white soul within the brown    Fleshy case of innocence, Must you warp and suffer long    Just for one small consequence, All the work of Providence! 
__label__political America I sing to you A hymn of love mixed with my tears, A hymn made up of thoughts that spring From many, many cruel years. I love you my America Who would not want to call me yours ; With all the wrongs that hemmed me in I stood up to defend your doors. Before I knew time, place, or scene, My mother kept before my view Your emblem lighted with the stars, Which I still saw there as I grew. And when I saw out in the bay Shining above all other glare The light that burns throughout the night, I smiled and said I need not fear. I thought it then a light to love, To liberty and every good ; But that was false — a light to hell I found it soon after I stood Upon the hill where Life took me To view the things that are as rare, To feel the teeth of poverty And pull at opportunity's bar. I had high hopes, bright dreams were mine, A future roseate as the light That limns the shadows of the hills Against the sky as dawn grows bright. Too soon hate's dark eclipse hid all The brightness of this day of hope; And your weak pride narrowed and bound My every effort, every scope. But still America I lived Scourged by the jeers, the taunts, the scorn ; Why should some men inherit love And some to such strong hate be born ? America I pay with love For all the hate you give to me; I take your jagged-edge cup and drink The drug of dark hate fearlessly. I know it can but drug the sense. And hold ambition to the earth ; For hate can never conquer me, Nor wrong rob me of all my mirth. I shall still cry, shall laugh and play Until some larger heart should come To light yours into flames of love That burn for all and not for some. And still a dream is in my soul In which I see you handing me A golden star of membership In this great world's fraternity. Then from the ruins of much wrong, Within the shining shop of right I'll forge for you a tower wherefrom Shall gleam earth's purest brightest light. Then all the nations of this world Shall look to you and call you great ; Because your light shall shine afar When one large love replaces hate. 
__label__political Oh bury my bones in the dark of the moon, In a place where the soil is bare, And none will say that I mar the clay Or the vine buds there too soon. But the worm will think me sweet somehow. As he gnaws away I’ll hear him say, “I scorn the taste of white flesh now.” 
__label__political Golgotha is a mountain, a purple mound Almost out of sight. One night they hanged two thieves there, And another man. Some women wept heavily that night; Their tears are flowing still. They have made a river; Once it covered me. Then the people went away and left Golgotha Deserted. Oh, I've seen many mountains: Pale purple mountains melting in the evening mists and blurring on the borders of the sky. I climbed old Shasta and chilled my hands in its summer snows. I rested in the shadow of Popocatepetl and it whispered to me of daring prowess. I looked upon the Pyrenees and felt the zest of warm exotic nights. I slept at the foot of Fujiyama and dreamed of legend and of death. And I've seen other mountains rising from the wistful moors like the breasts of a slender maiden. Who knows the mystery of mountains! Some of them are awful, others are just lonely. ... Italy has its Rome and California has San Francisco, All covered with mountains. Some think these mountains grew Like ant hills Or sand dunes. That might be so — I wonder what started them all! Babylon is a mountain And so is Nineveh, With grass growing on them; Palaces and hanging gardens started them. I wonder what is under the hills In Mexico And Japan! There are mountains in Africa too. Treasure is buried there: Gold and precious stones And moulded glory. Lush grass is growing there Sinking before the wind. Black men are bowing. Naked in that grass Digging with their fingers. I am one of them: Those mountains should be ours. It would be great To touch the pieces of glory with our hands. These mute unhappy hills, Bowed down with broken backs, Speak often one to another: " A day is as a year, " they cry, " And a thousand years as one day. " We watched the caravan That bore our queen to the courts of Solomon; And when the first slave traders came We bowed our heads. "Oh, Brothers, it is not long! Dust shall yet devour the stones But we shall be here when they are gone. " Mountains are rising all around me. Some are so small they are not seen; Others are large. All of them get big in time and people forget What started them at first. Oh the world is covered with mountains! Beneath each one there is something buried: Some pile of wreckage that started it there. Mountains are lonely and some are awful. ... One day I will crumble. They'll cover my heap with dirt and that will make a mountain. I think it will be Golgotha.
__label__political Sweet timber land Where soft winds blow The high green tree And fan away fog! Ah fragrant stream Where thirsty creatures go. And strong black men Hue the heavy log! Oh broken house Crumbling there alone. Wanting me! Oh silent tree Must I always be A wild bird Riding the wind And screaming bitterly? 
__label__political Here indeed is the rising surf, The sea you told me of: A singing wind, A sailing moon, And the long, cool wash of wave. And the breath of the storm-cloud: Darkness And the far, mysterious call Of lonely gulls. But all the simple sialor men Who knew you in that day, Tell me, Captain, Where, indeed, are they? 
__label__political This poem won the first prize of $75 in The Crisis prize contest of 1926.  I thought I saw an angel flying low, I thought I saw the flicker of a wing Above the mulberry trees; but not again. Bethesda sleeps. This ancient pool that healed A host of bearded Jews does not awake.  This pool that once the angels troubled does not move No angel stirs it now, no Saviour comes With healing in His hands to raise the sick And bid the lame man leap upon the ground.  The golden days are gone. Why do we wait So long upon the marble steps, blood Falling from our open wounds? and why Do our black faces search the empty sky? Is there something we have forgotten? some precious thing We have lost, wandering in strange lands?  There was a day, I remember now, I beat my breast and cried, “Wash me God, Wash me with a wave of wind upon The barley; O quiet One, draw near, draw near! Walk upon the hills with lovely feet And in the waterfall stand and speak.  “Dip white hands in the lily pool and mourn Upon the harps still hanging in the trees Near Babylon along the river's edge, But oh, remember me, I pray, before The summer goes and rose leaves lose their red.”  The old terror takes my heart, the fear Of quiet waters and of faint twilights. There will be better days when I am gone And healing pools where I cannot be healed. Fragrant stars will gleam forever and ever Above the place where I lie desolate.  Yet I hope, still I long to live. And if there can be returning after death I shall come back. But it will not be here; If you want me you must search for me Beneath the palms of Africa. Or if I am not there then you may call to me Across the shining dunes, perhaps I shall Be following a desert caravan.  I may pass through centuries of death With quiet eyes, but I'll remember still A jungle tree with burning scarlet birds. There is something I have forgotten, some precious thing. I shall be seeking ornaments of ivory, I shall be dying for a jungle fruit. You do not hear, Bethesda. O still green water in a stagnant pool! Love abandoned you and me alike. There was a day you held a rich full moon Upon your heart and listened to the words Of men now dead and saw the angels fly. There is a simple story on your face; Years have wrinkled you. I know, Bethesda! You are sad. It is the same with me. 
__label__political When I consider all the people on this stret I am sad. I am pained With thoughts of little feet, Black, brown, and yellow feet Walking up and down, Going nowhere. My heart breaks When I think of people on this lonely street. 
__label__political If for a day joy masters me,    Think not my wounds are healed; Far deeper than the scars you see    I keep their roots concealed. They shall bear blossoms with the fall;    I have their word for this  Who tend my roots with rains of gall,    And suns of prejudice.
__label__political She does not know Her beauty She thinks her brown body Has no glory If she could dance Naked Under palm trees And see her image in the river She would know But there are no palm trees On the street And dish water gives back no images
__label__political I would they were .... a Pegasus herd, And I could whip them Flying .... up the crest of Parnassus With great wings outspread and all a’shine In the morning sun. . But instead .... they trudge and crawl Like any plow horse-- A sluggish pack ....their broad backs wet And steaming In their labor. Their pace is so slow In the morning sun. . . .  
__label__political I got a job now Runnin an elevator In the Dennison Hotel in Jersey, Job aint no good though. No money around.    Jobs are just chances    Like everything else.    Maybe a little luck now,    Maybe not.    Maybe a good job sometimes:    Step out o' the barrel, boy. Two new suits an' A woman to sleep with.    Maybe no luck for a long time.    Only the elevators    Goin' up an' down,    Up an' down,    Or somebody else's shoes    To shine,    Or greasy pots in a dirty kitchen. I been runnin' this Elevator too long. Guess I'll quit now.
__label__political (For a Black Mother)  My little dark baby, My little earth-thing, My little love-one, What shall I sing For your lullaby?    Stars,    Stars,    A necklace of stars    Winding the night.  My little black baby, My dark body's baby, What shall I sing For your lullaby?    Moon,    Moon,    Great diamond moon,    Kissing the night.  Oh, little dark baby, Night black baby,    Stars, stars,    Moon,    Night stars,    Moon,    For your sleep-song lullaby! 
__label__political Singing black boatmen An August morning In the thick white fog at Sekondi Coming out to take Cargo From anchored alien ships. You do not know the fog We strange so-civilized ones Sail in always. 
__label__political She was young and beautiful And golden like the sunshine that warmed her body. And because she was colored Mayville had no place to offer her, Nor fuel for the clean flame of joy That tried to burn within her soul.  So one day, Sitting on old Mrs. Latham’s back porch Polishing the silver, She asked herself two questions. And they ran something like this: What can a colored girl do On the money from a white woman’s kitchen? And: Ain’t there any joy in this town?  Now the streets down by the river Know more about this pretty Ruby Brown, And the sinister shuttered houses of the Bottoms Hold a yellow girl Seeking an answer to her questions. The good church folk do not mention her mame any more.  But the white men, habitués of the high shuttered houses, Pay more money to her now than they ever did before, When she worked in their kitchens. 
__label__political The hour is big with sooth and sign, with errant men at war, While blood of alien, friend, and foe imbues the land afar, And we, with sable faces pent, move with the vanguard line. Shod with a faith that Springtime keeps, and all the stars opine.
__label__political To climb a hill that hungers for the sky, To dig my hands wrist deep in pregnant earth, To watch a young bird, veering, learn to fly, To give a still, stark poem shining birth. To hear the rain drool, dimpling, down the drain And splash with a wet giggle in the street, To ramble in the twilight after supper, And to count the pretty faces that you meet. To ride to town on trolleys, crowded, teeming With joy and hurry and laughter and push and sweat — Squeezed next a patent-leathered Negro dreaming Of a wrinkled river and a minnow net. To buy a paper from a breathless boy, And read of kings and queens in foreign lands, Hyperbole of romance and adventure, All for a penny the color of my hand. To lean against a strong tree's bosom, sentient And hushed before the silent prayer it breathes, To melt the still snow with my seething body And kiss the warm earth tremulous underneath. Ah, life, to let your stabbing beauty pierce me And wound me like we did the studded Christ, To grapple with you, loving you too fiercely, And to die bleeding — consummate with Life.
__label__political Upstairs on the third floor Of the 135th Street library In Harlem, I saw a little Bottle of sand, brown sand Just like the kids make pies Out of down at the beach. But the label said: “This Sand was taken from the Sahara desert.” Imagine that! The Sahara desert! Some bozo's been all the way to Africa to get some sand. And yesterday on Seventh Avenue I saw a darky dressed fit to kill In yellow gloves and swallow tail coat And swirling a cane. And everyone Was laughing at him. Me too, At first, till I saw his face When he stopped to hear a Organ grinder grind out some jazz. Boy! You should a seen that darky's face! It just shone. Gee, he was happy! And he began to dance. No Charleston or Black Bottom for him. No sir. He danced just as dignified And slow. No, not slow either. Dignified and proud! You couldn't Call it slow, not with all the Cuttin' up he did. You would a died to see him. The crowd kept yellin' but he didn't hear, Just kept on dancin' and twirlin' that cane And yellin' out loud every once in a while. I know the crowd thought he was coo-coo. But say, I was where I could see his face, And somehow, I could see him dancin' in a jungle, A real honest-to-cripe jungle, and he wouldn't have on them Trick clothes—those yaller shoes and yaller gloves And swallow-tail coat. He wouldn't have on nothing. And he wouldn't be carrying no cane. He'd be carrying a spear with a sharp fine point Like the bayonets we had “over there." And the end of it would be dipped in some kind of Hoo-doo poison. And he'd be dancin' black and naked and gleaming. And he'd have rings in his ears and on his nose And bracelets and necklaces of elephants' teeth. Gee, I bet he'd be beautiful then all right. No one would laugh at him then, I bet. Say! That man that took that sand from the Sahara desert And put it in a little bottle on a shelf in the library, That's what they done to this shine, ain't it? Bottled him. Trick shoes, trick coat, trick cane, trick everything--    all glass-- But inside-- Gee, that poor shine!
__label__political Ah, little road all whirry in the breeze, A leaping clay hill lost among the trees, The bleeding note of rapture streaming thrush Caught in a drowsy hush And stretched out in a single singing line of dusky song. Ah little road, brown as my race is brown, Your trodden beauty like our trodden pride, Dust of the dust, they must not bruise you down. Rise to one brimming golden, spilling cry!
__label__political Her eyes had caught a bit of loveliness, A flower blooming in the prison yard; She ran to it and pressed it to her lips, This Godsend of a land beyond the walls; She drank its divine beauty with her kiss. A guard wrested the flower from her hand-- With awful art her humble back laid bare, Soft skin and darker than a dreamless night; He tossed aside the burden of her hair. "I'll teach you to pick flowers in this yard. They ain't for n*****s." He began to flog. Her pale palmed hands grasped the thin air in quest Until, like two antalgic words, they fell And whispered something to her heaving breast. Then she forgot the misery of her back. Somehow she knew that God, her God was there: That what was pain was but her striped flesh. Her soul, inviolate, was havened in prayer. On a cross of bigotry she was crucified Because she was not white. And like her Father On the holyrood, whispered "Forgive." And in her eyes there shone a Candlemas light. He flung the whip into the flower bed He did not even see that she was dead. 
__label__political Where are the brave men? Where are the strong men? Pygmies rise and spawn the earth, Weak-kneed, weak-hearted and afraid! Afraid to face the counsel of their timid hearts, Afraid to look men squarely— Down they gaze With fatal fascination— Down, Down Into the whirling maggot-sands Of prejudice! 
__label__political Yolk-colored tongue Parched beneath a burning sky, A lazy little tune Hummed up the crest of some Soft sloping hill. One streaming line of beauty Flowing by a forest Pregnant with tears. A hidden nest for beauty Idly flung by God In one lonely lingering hour Before the Sabbath. A blue- fruited black gum, Like a tall predella, Bears a dangling figure, Sacrificial dower to the raff, Swinging alone, A solemn, tortured shadow in the air.
__label__political The moon flung down the bower of her hair, A sacred cloister while she knelt at prayer. She crossed pale bosom, breathed a sad amen-- Then bound her hair about her  head again. 
__label__political I'm happy that you graduated high, It stirs my pride to see what you could do In these times, when our ways are all awry And threatened by the vulgar parvenu. Our noble name is linked with all the good New England yielded from her sterling worth, To make our country great and understood Among the greater nations of the earth. Our line is of a sturdy English breed, That sought an alien land for human rights; We always have insisted on the need Of viewing life from our own lofty heights. Only your great grandfather once went wrong, Becoming radical in slavery days, When party strife the country cleaved for long And petty agitators strove for praise. Remember to forget your great grand-father, Sometimes you worry me with traits like his, Shun sentimental liberals, but rather Uphold the law and give to charities.
__label__political The quavering zigzag of the fiddle’s notes; The thumping “tum-tum” of the banjo and guitar; The gauzy quiver, flutter of the fiddle; The measured muffled thud of that guitar! And then a voice breaks forth— Loose, careless, mellow— A wealth of voice that rolls, soars, Rolls and falls, A reveling, rich voice, Deeper than the banjo’s; With more of melody than fiddles’ trebles, Yet with that subtle minor trembling through  Which shakes the viol’s slender vibrance As the winds might— And all of this out in a half-hushed autumn dusk! The autumn air itself is tense, suspended, And into this that most spontaneous song! Which ripples on and floats and floats Midst “thum” of banjo And rhythmic background of that constant taut guitar, And travels with the wavers of the fiddle, To float and rise and rest with moon and star!  
__label__political Happiness  I went in quest of happiness Upon a golden mountain But she was in the plain below Beside the public fountain.  I sought her in the sea-blue waves And singing sun-lit billows But she was in the placid stream Beneath the shady willows.  I looked for her in city crowds That filled the great white way But found her on a lowly farm, A milkmaid, tawny, gay.  Death  My heart keeps a knockin’,—    Thump, thump, thump. My heart keeps a knockin',--    Bump, bump, bump. Some day Death is gonna answer de door Then my heart ain’t gonna knock no more An’ there won’t be no thump, thump, thump An’ there won’t be no bump, bump, bump. 
__label__political The moon is laughing at the sky; The pale white moon derides the black-faced sky: You should not be so bold, vain moon, Your song would be a listless tune Did not its strains come echoing back From off the sky so dark, so black. 
__label__political O' de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', H'it's one long strip Hangin' up an' down— Jes' Souf an' Norf; Jes' Norf an' Souf.  Talkin' 'bout sailin' 'round de wurl'— Huh! I'd be so dizzy my head 'ud twurl. If dis heah earf wuz jes' a ball You no the people all 'ud fall.  O' de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', H'it's one long strip Hangin' up an' down— Jes' Souf an' Norf; Jes' Norf an' Souf.  Talkin' 'bout the City whut Saint John saw— Chile you oughta go to Saginaw; A n*****'s chance is “finest kind,” An' pretty gals ain't hard to find.  Huh! de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', Jes' one long strip Hangin' up an' down. Since Norf is up, An' Souf is down, An' Hebben is up, I'm upward boun'.
__label__political Feet F-e-e-t Faces F-a-c-e-s Bodies B-o-d-i-e-s Tobacco scented B-O-D-I-E-S The Durham streets at dusk Are swarmed with color. It is the moving panorama Painted by the factory artist Each dusk.
__label__political I wonder If the man  To whom she gives her love: Sees her as the mother of his children, Or the woman for his body's pleasure?  The sad black girl upon his arm Goes to the factory each morning at seven. She works beside him the hours through. They trudge down Pettigrew Street each dusk.  She is his daily companion, his choice. She is snubbed by the shoppers of Fayetteville Street; Who forget that she makes them. I wonder if her husband too forgets?  I wonder If the man  To whom she gives her love: Sees her as the mother of his children, Or the woman for his body's pleasure?
__label__political From the factory doors The pageant pours Down the mud of Pettigrew Street. The sound of feet Treads on my heart And stupefies its beat.  The factories take my people's souls And give them out in smoke. Oh, why should souls be made to burn And spirits thus to choke?
__label__political Brown slender fingers on the ivory keys, What is the strange alluring theme you play? Whence came those rhythms, wild and sad and gay, And whence those weird, exotic harmonies? Where did you find such cadences as these Which seem, in fierce abandon, to portray The rhythmic beat of tom-toms far away, The wild wind sighing through the jungle trees? Thrilled by the subtle magic of your spell, Methinks I see fantastic scenes arise Of weird, strange dances in some sunlit dell Beneath the splendor of the tropic skies; And fancy bears me far across the earth To lands of endless sunshine, love and mirth!
__label__political Paint me a God, as black as I am black,      As black as night, as black as ebony,      Whose comely hue and flowing locks shall be, But as the down on an albino’s back. Paint me a God, Oh, artist, do not slack,      Paint Him divine and for eternity;      Clothe Him with might, and love, and majesty, Make Him the King of all this motley pack. A God that I can muse of day and night,      And in my dreamings see a swarthy face, A God to keep my racial armor bright,      On land or sea, in high or lowly place, Endow Him not with gifts of Nordic light;      Paint me a God, in likeness of my race.
__label__political I love you for your brownness And the rounded darkness of your breast. I love you for the breaking sadness in your voice And shadows where your wayward eye-lids rest. Something of old forgotten queens Lurks in the lithe abandon of your walk And something of the shackled slave Sobs in the rhythm of your talk. Oh, little brown girl, born for sorrow's mate, Keep all you have of queenliness, Forgetting that you once were slave, And let your full lips laugh at Fate!
__label__political GO THROUGH the gates with closed eyes. Stand erect and let your black face front the west. Drop the axe and leave the timber where it lies; A woodman on the hill must have his rest. Go where leaves are lying brown and wet. Forget her warm arms and her breast who mothered you, And every face you ever loved forget. Close your eyes; walk bravely through.
__label__political I    Once more, listening to the wind and rain,  Once more, you and I, and above the hurting sound  Of these comes back the throbbing of remembered rain,  Treasured rain falling on dark ground.  Once more, huddling birds upon the leaves  And summer trembling on a withered vine.  And once more, returning out of pain,  The friendly ghost that was your love and mine.     II    The throb of rain is the throb of muffled drums;  Darkness brings the jungle to our room.  Darkness hangs our room with pendulums  Of vine and in the gathering gloom  Our walls recede into a denseness of  Surrounding trees. This is a night of love  Retained from those lost nights our fathers slept  In huts; this is a night that cannot die.  Let us keep the dance of rain our fathers kept  And tread our dreams beneath the jungle sky.    III   The downpour ceases.  Let us go back, you and I, and dance  Once more upon the glimmering leaves  And as the throbbing of drums increases  Shake the grass and the drippimg boughs of trees.  A ary wind stirs the palm; the old tree grieves.  Lime has charged the years and they have returned.  Then let us dance by metal waters burned  With gold of moon, let us dance  With naked feet beneath the young spice trees.  What was that light, that radiance  On your face?—something I saw when first  You passed beneath the jungle tapestries?  A moment we pause to quench our thirst  Kneeling at the water’s edge, the gleam  Upon your face is plain; you have wanted this,  Oh let us go back and search the tangled dream  And as the muffled-drum-beats throb and miss  Remember again how. early darkness comes   To dreams and silence to the drums.    IV    Let us go back into the dusk again,  Slow and sad-like following the track  Of blown leaves and cool white rain  Into the old grey dreams; let us go back.  Our walls close about us, we lie and listen  To the noise of the street, the storm and the driven birds.  A question shapes your lips, your eyes glisten   Retaining tears, but there are no more words. 
__label__political So while a lessening glint of sun ray Loiters golden in your hair, Pale girl, do you not mourn for memories of the morning? Would you not stay the failing beam? We who were born in the night know songs For the deep, cold watches of gloom. Lie down, O kith of the glorious day, And weep while Sorrow sings.  
__label__political Old Mansion By Arna Bontemps Poplars are standing there still as death And ghosts of dead men Meet their ladies walking Two by two beneath the shade And standing on the marble steps. There is a sound of music Echoing through the door And in the field there is Another sound tinkling in the cotton: Chains of bondsmen dragging on the ground. The years go back with an iron clank. A hand is on the gate, A dry leaf trembles on the wall. Ghosts are walking. They have broken roses down And poplars stand there still as death. 
__label__political Do you remember how that glowing morn We stood hands clasped beside an amber pool Of lilies pale as your fair skin, and cool On my brown cheek was the misty breath of dawn? You said, "We too are friends, for we were born To dwell at beauty's shrine. There is no rule That being brown and fair, we play the fool 'Til friendship flee, a tarnished gleam forlorn." 'Twas then I saw amid the thin-leaved grass Th souls of dead men and men yet to be; Blue fires, old thrilling hopes that leaped and died When you in dread, a childhood friend espied-- And seeing his slow smile, you shrank from me-- Then, ... my faith dead ... I turned ... and ... let ... you pass.
__label__political He mocks the God invisible To whom his mother prays; “What stands on faith for proof is built On shifting sands,” he says. To him life ts a heartless game: “I grapple, fight, defy,” He says: “the world is his who wins; The losers, let them dte.” Ah, greenhorn-pilgrim, duped by thieves And left to writhe in dirt Beside the way to Jericho— Wounded, robbed—and hurt!
__label__political His friends went off and left Him dead in Joseph's subterranean bed, Embalmed with myrrh and sweet aloes, And wrapped in snow-white burial clothes. Then shrewd men came and set a seal Upon His grave, lest thieves should steal His lifeless form away, and claim For Him an undeserving fame. “There is no use,” the soldiers said, “Of standing sentries by the dead.” Wherefore, they drew their cloaks around Themselves, and fell upon the ground, And slept like dead men, all night through, In the pale moonlight and chilling dew. A muffled whiff of sudden breath Ruffled the passive air of death. He woke, and raised Himself in bed; Recalled how He was crucified; Touched both hand's fingers to His head, And lightly felt His fresh-healed side, Then with a deep, triumphant sigh, He coolly put His grave-clothes by— Folded the sweet, white winding sheet,      The toweling, the linen bands, The napkin, all with careful hands— And left the borrowed chamber neat. His steps were like the breaking day: So soft across the watch He stole, He did not wake a single soul, Nor spill one dewdrop by the way. Now Calvary was loveliness:      Lilies that flowered thereupon Pulled off the white moon's pallid dress,      And put the morning's vesture on. “Why seek the living among the dead? He is not here,” the angel said. The early winds took up the words, And bore them to the lilting birds, The leafing trees, and everything That breathed the living breath of spring.
__label__political You have the freedom of all the earth, But what of me? You receive the value of your mind's worth, But what of me? The air we breathe, the sights we see, Are they for you, too, and not for me? Oh, what of me? Ah, you may have the works of man, But God gives the beauties of the land– That's for me.
__label__political Your tears are wasted, maiden of my race.  There is no law that makes white kin to black;  And your lover swings there alone. Your tears are wasted, Maiden of my race. Loud, boisterous yells of the mob; Souless men who claim their blood, And sell as souvenirs the lean bones. The common and the noble herd are there, Amidst a thousand tongues acclaimed brave,  And the leader sits high on his throne. Brown maiden, you beat your bosom in despair, And hang on the corpse of your beloved. Your tears are wasted, One of my race.
__label__political Who puts his wagon to a star,      Shall drive it but a night. For unseen things will only bar      The ones that are in sight. Every man may be alert and quick,      But first he must be slow. The world is not so hard to lick,      But first a man must know. A dreaming life is a wasted one,      Look inwardly upon your soul: The battle fought will then be won,      And you have attained your goal.
__label__political He'd play, after the bawdy songs and blues, After the weary plaints Of “Trouble, Trouble deep down in muh soul,” Always one song in which he'd lose the role Of entertainer to the boys. He'd say “My mother’s favorite.” And we knew That what was coming was his chant of saints “When de Saints go ma’chin home And that would end his concert for the day.  Carefully as an old maid over needlework, Oh, as some black deacon, over his Bible, lovingly, He'd tune up specially for this. There'd be No chatter now, no patting of the feet. After a few slow chords, knelling and sweet Oh when de saints go ma’chin home Oh when de sayaints goa ma'chin home He would forget The quieted bunch, his dimming cigarette Stuck into a splintered edge of the guitar. Sorrow deep hidden in his voice, a far And soft light in his strange brown eyes; Alone with his masterchords, his memories. . .    Lawd I wanna be one in nummer    When de saints go ma’chin home. Deep the bass would rumble while the treble, scattered high For all the world like heavy feet a trompin’ toward the sky. With shrillvoiced women getting ‘happy’ All to celestial tunes. The chap’s few speeches helped me understand The reason why he gazed so fixedly Upon the burnished strings. For he would see A gorgeous procession to ‘de Beulah Land’ Of Saints—his friends—‘a climbin’ fo’ deir wings.’ Oh when de saints go ma’chin home Lawd I wanna be one o’ dat nummer When de saints goa ma’chin home...  2.   THERE’D BE—so ran his dream “Old Deacon Zachary With de asthmy in his chest A puffin’ an’ a wheezin’ Up de golden stair Wid de badges of his lodges Strung acrost his heavin’ breast An’ de hoggrease jest shinin’ In his coal black hair An’ ole Sis Joe In huh big straw hat An’ huh wrapper flappin’ Flappin’ in de heavenly win’ An’ huh thinsoled easy walkers Goin’ pitty pitty pat Lawd she'd have to ease her corns When she got in!” Oh when de saints go ma’chin home. “Ole Elder Peter Johnson Wid his corncob jes a puffin’ And de smoke a rollin’ Like stormclouds out behin’ Crossin’ de cloud mountains Widout slowin’ up fo’ nuffin’ Steamin’ up de grade Lak Wes’ bound No. 9: An’ de little brownskinned chillen Wid deir skinny legs a dancin’ Jes’ a kickin’ up ridic’lous To de heavenly band Lookin’ at de Great Drum Major On a white hoss jes’ a prancin’ Wid and gold and silver drumstick A waggin’ in his han’. Oh when de sun refuse to shine Oh when de mo-on goes down In Blood “Old Maumee Annie Wid huh washin’ done An’ huh las’ piece o° laundry In de renchin’ tub, A wavin’ sof’ pink han’s To de much obligin’ sun An’ her feet a moverin’ now To a swif’ rub a dub; And old Grampa Eli Wid his wrinkled old haid A puzzlin’ over summut He ain’ understood Intendin’ to ask Peter Pervidin’ he ain't skyaid ‘Jes what mought be de meanin’ Of de moon in blood? . . . Wen de saints go ma'chin home  3.  WHUFFOLKS, he dreams, will have to stay outside Being so onery.’ But what is he to do With that red brakemen who once let him ride An empty, going home? Or with that kindfaced man Who paid his songs with board and drink and bed? Or with the Yankee Cap'n who left a leg At Vicksburg? ‘Mought be a place, he said Mought be another mansion for’ white saints A smaller one than hisn’ not so gran’ As for the rest oh let them howl and beg. Hell would be good enough, if big enough Widout no shade trees, lawd, widout no rain Whuffolks sho to bring n**** out behin’ Excep’—wen de saints go ma’chin home.  4.  Sportin’ Legs would not be there—nor lucky Sam Nor Smitty, nor Hambone, nor Hardrock Gene An’ not too many guzzlin’, cuttin’ shines Nor bootleggers to keep his pockets clean. An’ Sophie wid de sof’ smile on her face, Her foolin’ voice, her strappin’ body, brown Lak coffee doused wid milk—she had been good To him, wid lovin’, money and wid food.— But saints and heaven didn’t seem to fit Jes rite wid Sophy’s Beauty—nary bit She mought stir trouble, somehow, in dat peaceful place Mought be some dressed up dudes in dat fair town  5.   She got a dear ole modder She is in hebben I know He sees Mammy L‘il mammy—wrinkled face Her brown eyes, quick to tears—to joy With such happy pride in her Guitar plunkin’ boy. Oh kain't I be one in nummer? Mammy With deep religion defeating the grief Life piled so closely about her Ise so glad trouble doan last ‘alway’ And her dogged belief That some fine day She'd go a machin When de saints go ma'chin home. He sees her ma’chin home, ma’chin along, Her perky joy shining in her furrowed face, Her weak and quavering voice singing her song— The best chair set apart for her worn out body In that restful place . . . I pray to de Lawd I'll meet her When de saints go ma’chin home.  6.   He'd shuffle off from us, always, at that, His face a brown study beneath his torn brimmed hat His broad shoulders slouching, his old box strung Around his neck;—he’d go where we Never could follow him—to Sophie probably, Or to his dances--in old Tinbridge flat.   Published in Opportunity, July 1927 Awarded First Prize in Opportunity Poetry Competition, 1927
__label__political Darktown folk Do dream. They sit in the front parlor And talk. Sometimes About cotton Or the new Ford Or the new kid Come to town; Or Jim Jones’ boy At college. But at other times They just sit And say nothing at all.
__label__political Why do the bards of black folk Sing grief brushed over with gladness? Because God sculptured the soul of the race In a moment of wistful sadness.  Why do the bards of black folk Sing joy that follows all sorrow? God’s tool when He sculptured the soul of the race Was “The Hope of the Unborn Morrow.” 
__label__political Oh, haunting melodies of grief and pain; Oh, heart-wrung agonies distilled in song; Oh, moving minors—weird, pathetic strain; Oh, trembling cries forced by the cruel thong Of Hate! Oh whisperings of hope and faith, Breathing fidelity to Unseen Love, From bleeding, bruised souls lashed to the earth; Oh, soft appealing moans, potent to move Upon the calloused hearts of world-worn men; Sweet voices of my brothers from the past Dark night of slavery, dread era when These little ones were in its power held fast; Sad Sorrow Songs, you yet shall come to be Brave shouts of victory from Souls set free! 
__label__political My words shall drip Like molten lava From the towering black volcano, On the sleeping town ’Neath its summit. My thoughts shall be Hot ashes Burning all in its path. I shall not stop Because critics sneer, Nor stoop to fawning At man’s mere fancy. I shall breathe A clearer freer air For I shall see the sun Above the crowd,  I shall not blush And make excuse When a son of Adam, Who calls himself “God’s Layman,” Slashes with scorn A thing born from Truth’s womb and nursed By beauty. It will not Matter who stoops To cast the first stone. Does not my spirit Soar above these feeble Minds? thoughts born From prejudice’s womb And nursed by tradition?  I will shatter the wall Of darkness that rises From gleaming day And seeks to hide the sun. I will turn this wall of  Darkness (that is night) Into a thing of beauty. I will take from the hearts Of black men-- Prayers their lips  Are 'fraid to utter. And turn their coarseness Into a beauty of the jungle Whence they came. The lava from the black volcano Shall be words--the ashes--thoughts  Of all men.
__label__political Bodies are lamps And their life is the light. Ivory, Gold, Bronze and Ebony— Yet all are lamps And their lives the lights.  Dwelling in the tabernacles     Of the most high—are lamps. Lighting the weary pilgrims’ way     As they travel the dreary night—are lamps. Swinging aloft in great Cathedrals     Beaming on rich and poor alike—are lamps. Flickering fitfully in harlot dives     Wanton as they that dwell therein— are lamps. Ivory, Gold, Bronze and Ebony— Yet all are lamps And their lives the lights.  Some flames rise high above the horizon     And urge others to greater power. Some burn steadfast thru the night     To welcome the prodigal home. Others flicker weakly, lacking oil to burn     And slowly die unnoticed. What matter how bright the flame     How weak? What matter how high it blazes     How low? A puff of wind will put it out.  You and I are lamps—Ebony lamps, Our flame glows red and rages high within But our ebon shroud becomes a shadow And our light seems weak and low.     Break that shadow     And let the flame illumine heaven     Or blow wind…blow     And let our feeble lights go out. 
__label__political My sweet, red blood to snuff the Yellow hate, My proud, White flesh a Black girl’s pangs to ease, My muscles wrenched a Red-skin’s wrongs to crush, My entire body diced to clean the slate, Sheer mock-heroics? They'll have love of me: The long-enduring, mystical Chinese, The colored girls whose goodness makes me blush, The kind-faced squaws who peddle basketry. They'll have it. Great God, surely it is right? He taught it . . . Thy son pleasing in Thy sight— No dawdling, half-way measures satisfy— I must earn sure approval in Thine eye. Failing, I plunge (may nothing me exempt) In cauldron—seething, scalding self-contempt.
__label__political Cry Shame upon me if you must,  Shout Treason and Default,  Say I betray a sacred trust  Aching beyond this vault.  I'll bear your censure as your praise,  Yet never shall a clan  Confine my singing to its ways  Beyond the ways of man.    No racial option narrows grief; Pain is no patriot;  And sorrow braids her dismal leaf  For all as lief as not.  With blind sheep groping every hill  Seeking an oriflamme,  What shepherd heart would keep its fill  For only the darker lamb?  
__label__political Leather skin of a tom-tom stretched loosely over dried marrowless bones then painted with a brown the color of parched corn old and bent like the hands of the town clock at two minutes past six eyes the color of weatherbeaten brown calico and with just that much brilliance born working will go out the same way she had a son he is now doing time at Leavenworth  for bootlegging her tomorrow is like her today yet she can sing of a Saviour Jesus who washed away the sins of the world and left her white as snow of a rest that will come in the Great Beyond. What a tragedy it would be if she were mistaken. 
__label__political  Tell me, swart children of the Southland   Chopping at cotton    In the sandy soil,   What do ye dream?   What deeds, what words of heroes   Leaven and lighten up   Your toil?   Know ye of L’Ouverture who freed a nation?   Heard ye of Crispus Attucks,   Or of Young?   Does fiery Vesey   Stir the spark within ye,   Or Douglass   Of the rare and matchless tongue?   That Washington   Who moulded a Tuskegee—   Does he inspire ye?   Does brave Moton thrill?   Mark ye Du Bois    That proud, unyielding eagle,   Beckoning ye higher than the highest hill?    But the swart children   Of the Southland   Stopping to dash the sweatbeads   From dull brows,   Answer: “These names   Mean nothing to us,    They, nor the unheard causes they espouse.   Only we know meek Jesus,   Thorn-encircled,   Broken and bleeding   In his Passion’s totls;   And Lazarus   Sharing crumbs with dogs;   And Job,   Potsherd in hand, a-scraping at his boils!  
__label__political She kneeled before me begging      That I should with a prayer Give her absolution      (How golden was her hair!) She begged an absolution      While the moments fled, She thought my tears were pity       (My Soul, her lips were red!) She begged of me forgiveness,      God you understand (For pale and soft and slender      Was her dainty hand!) She begged that I should pray You      That her Soul might rest But I could not pray, O Master      (Ivory was her breast!)
__label__political God’s Garden  GOD nurtures in his garden many fruits. Some, very slow of growth, become at last Sweet and enduring. Some put forth their shoots With hasty promise, bloom and soon are past. Each has its season and the husbandman Waits patiently, remembering that each Must strive within its nature as it can Its own appointed destiny to reach. So patiently the eye of faith can see The nettle-blooms of war and hate increase, While slowly through the ages grows that tree Whose leaves are healing and whose fruit is peace. 
__label__political Down in Georgia  a danglin’ n***** hangin’ in a tree  ....kicks holes in the laughing sunlight—        A little red haired        Irish girl . . . grey eyes        and a blue dress—        A little black babe        in a lacy white cap...        The soft red lips        of the little red head        kiss        so tenderly        the little black head—        grey eyes smile        into black eyes        and the gay sunlight        laughs joyously        in a burst of gold...        Down in Georgia        a danglin’ n*****       hangin’ in a tree  ...kicks holes in the laughing sunlight— 
__label__political Ma Lord ain’t no stuck up man. Ma Lord, he ain’t proud. When he goes a walkin’ He gives me his hand. You ma friend, he ‘lowed.  Ma Lord knows what it is to work. He knows how to pray. Ma Lord’s life was trouble, too, Trouble ever day.  Ma Lord ain’t no stuck up man. He’s a friend o’ mine. When he went to heaben, His soul like fire, He tole me I was gwine. He said Sho you'll come wid me  An’ be ma friend through eternity. 
__label__political Once you were beautiful,— Now, Hunched in the cold, Nobody cares That you are old.  Once you were lovely, —  Now, In the street, No one remembers Your lips were sweet.  Oh, withered old woman Of rue Fontaine Nobody but Death Will kiss you again 
__label__political The Town I lived with my aunt in a small town. There were lots of colored people there. It was a nice town with trees in it and at the end of our street a river and a little house where a colored man sold whisky and sometimes beer .   .   .   My aunt liked our town. She said she always lived there. My uncle liked our town, too .  .  .  He washed his overalls in the backyard on Sundays .   .   .  There were two churches in our town.  The School There were colored children in the town school. All the little colored children were in one room and the teacher was colored, too. I don’t think she liked the school.   .   .  When I was in the third grade I went into another room with the white children and the teacher was white, too. I don’t think she liked the school either. She said we were all bad children.  .   .   Sometimes they slapped me in the school.  The Difference You’re a nigger. You ain’t as good as I am ‘cause you're a nigger.  .  . Paul said that to me but he didn’t mean to hurt me when he said it. He was my friend. We played games together all the time and we went to the woods on Saturdays to look for May apples and birds . . . He said you ain’t as good as I am. You're a nigger, but he didn’t mean to hurt me.   .   .  I asked my aunt what I should say when Paul said you're a nigger. I liked Paul so I asked my aunt what I should say.  The Soul God! I ain’t afraid of God! Earl said, and God didn’t strike him dead.  .  .  Come all ye who love the Lord and lay your burdens down. They sang slow in church Sunday morning. It was Revival Day and Earl went up and sat on the mourner’s bench.  .  .  And I went up, too, ashamed . . . Come all ye who love the Lord . . . and my aunt was kneeling down beside me praying.  .  .   and the old folks in the amen-corner were praying .  .  . And the preacher said do you love God? And I said yes. And the preacher said do you accept Him? And I said yes. And I was converted . . . And my aunt got up and the old folks screamed hallelujah and sang glory to the name of the Lord.  .  .  And I went home and cried in bed because I was ashamed.  .  . I didn’t love God . . . And I was ashamed to lie about I didn’t love God.  The Body My aunt said be careful about girls.  . . Clarence, next door, was the father of a baby.  .  . Clarence was sixteen years old.  .  .  Clarence was arrested and had to marry the mother of his baby.  .  .  My aunt said be careful about girls.  .  . I went to her house at four o'clock in the afternoon. She said I should come.  .  . My aunt said be careful about girls.  .  . I didn’t know much about girls.  .  . Her mother worked all day in Mrs. Ronnermann’s kitchen. Her mother didn’t get home until after supper.  .  . My aunt said be careful about girls . . . She said I should come. Her mother didn’t get home until after supper . . . Be careful about girls.  Death My grandmother died on Thursday.  .  . Grandmother.  .  . I didn’t want her to die on Thursday.  .  . Every Thursday I sold papers and I missed selling papers because she died on Thursday.  .  . Somebody woke me up at three o'clock in the morning because my grandmother was dead. I went outdoors looking for my grandmother.  .  . She wasn’t there. The moon was there, cold and ugly, but no ghost of my g r a n d m o t h e r . . . They wrapped her up in sheets and sent her away to the undertaker’s. I didn’t sell any papers on Thursday.  .  .  missed my grandmother . . . We moved away to another town. I went to another school. I didn’t sell any more papers on Thursdays. I went to work in a big hotel.  .  . I missed my grandmother. 
__label__political I went walkin’ By de blue bayou An’ I saw de sun go down. I thought about old Greeley An’ I thought about Lou, ~ An’ I saw de sun go down.    White man    Makes me work all day,    An’ I works damn hard    For damn little pay,    Then a white man takes    Ma woman away—    I'll kill old Greeley.    An’ de blue bayou turns red as fire.    Put the n***** on a rope    An’ pull him higher! An’ I saw de sun go down.    Put the n***** on a rope    An’ pull him higher! De blue bayou’s a pool o’ fire, An’ I saw de sun go down,    Down,        Down, Lawd! I saw de sun go down.
__label__political Today I go back to the sea And the wind-beaten rise of the foam. Today I go back to the sea— And it’s just as though I were home. It’s just as though I were home again On this ship of iron and steam, And it’s just as though I have found again The broken edge of a dream. 
__label__political I Know now That Notre Dame is in Paris. And the Seine is more to me now Than a wriggling line on a map Or a name in travel stories. I know now There is a Crystal Palace in Antwerp Where a hundred women sell their naked bodies, And the night-lovers of sailors Wait for men on docks in Genoa. I know now That a great golden moon Like a picture-book moon Really rises behind palm groves In Africa, And tom-toms do beat In village squares under the mango trees. I know now That Venice is a church dome And a net-work of canals, Tangiers a whiteness under sun. I thought It was Tangiers I wanted, Or the gargoyles of Notre Dame, Or the Crystal Palace in Antwerp, Or the golden palm-grove moon in Africa, Or a church dome and a net-work of canals. Happiness lies nowhere, Some old fool said, If not within oneself. It’s a sure thing Notre Dame is in Paris,— But I thought it was Tangiers I wanted.
__label__political You are disdainful and magnificent- Your perfect body and your pompous gait, Your dark eyes flashing solemnly with hate, Small wonder that you are incompetent To imitate those whom you so despise Your shoulders towering high above the throng, Your head thrown back in rich, barbaric song, Palm trees and mangoes stretched before your eyes. Let others toil and sweat for labor's sake And wring from grasping hands their meed of gold. Why urge ahead your supercilious feet? Scorn will efface each footprint that you make. I love your laughter arrogant and bold. You are too splendid for this city street!
__label__political America, here is your son, born of your iron heel, Black blood and red and white contend along this frame of steel. The thorns deep in his brow are set and yet he does not cower, He goes with neither fears nor tears to crucifixion hour. Nor yet does hatred blur his view of mankind’s frail parade, From his commanding triple coign, all prejudices fade. The ebbing nations coalesce in him and flow as one, The bright shining rainbow sweeping back to God at set of sun! Mark well the surety of tread, the new song high in air, The new note in the nation’s throat, as permanent as prayer. America, regard your son, The Cosmopolitan, The pattern of posterity, The True American. 
__label__political Hey, ho, Hasting! Hear me sing, dis song. Hurry, Hasting, 'Cause my time ain't long!  Strollin' up Hasting With a roamin' min'. Wonderin', wonderin', Jus' what I can fin'.  Roam dis country, Lawd, from part to part, Ain' faun' nothin' But a bleedin' heart.  Po' boy, Po' boy, Whut you lookin' fa w? Min's in Texas, Heart's in Arkansas.  My old mammy Long, long, years ago Died in Dallas. She ain' heah no mo'.  Foun’ a good gal On de Ouachita. She lef’ Po' Boy Broke in Arkansas.  Lef' dat ole town. Mus' go back some day. Had no lovin' Since I went away.  Killed a cracker Down in Tennessee. See his white face Grinnin' now at me.  Ole an' worr'ed, Worr'ed ... mighty blue. Wondah, good Lawd, Whut I'm gonah do.  Wish I was  A wee, wee boy again, Runnin', lafin', Glad, an' free f'om sin.  Had a buddy Runnin' 'roun' wid me. Tired of Ian' an' He put out to sea.  Foun' anothah In a Georgia town. Big hearted buddy, He would nevah froun'.  Whut he had, I had. Top-notch frien' to me…  Crackers got him Out in Tennessee.  Got no meat, Lawd. I ain't had no bread. Had no lovin'. I ain' got no bed.  To de pool room  See de boys play pool. Weak an' hongry, Felt jus' lak a fool.  Saw no cue ball. Cue shook in my han'. Po' . . . Po' . . . Po' Boy, Po' Boy in dis lan'.  Don' b'lieve Jesus Knows about po' me. Will you, Hasting, Ease my misery?  "Po' Boy, Po' Boy, You look mighty bad. B'lieve fo' God Yo' great big heart is sad."  God done quit me.  Friends done all gone too. Tell me, Hasting, Whut I oughtah do.  "Po' Boy, Po' Boy, Fall upon yo' knees…  Beg you' Maker Ease yo' troubles, please."  Hasting, Hasting, In all confidence, Prayah an' hongry,– They cain' be good friends.  Snow is fallin'. Night is creepin' on. Worl' is gloomy. My las' penny's gone.  Got no Mammy. I ain't got no pal. Hope done lef' me. I ain't got no gal.  Went to de wharf an' Looked out on de lake. B'lieve 'fo' God dat Life is all a fake.  Mis'ry, Mis'ry, Stealin' up on me.  Lake kept smilin' … Smilin' up at me.  "Careful, Po' Boy, Cautious Po' Boy, deah, Ease you' mis'ry, –  Drown yo' troubles heah."  Up in heaven, Way down deep in hell, May be better ... You can nevah tell.  Hey, ho, Hasting! Heah me sing dis song. Hurry, Hasting, 'Cause my time ain' long.
__label__political After years of blindly groping Through the midst of light we see, Tiring of this useless hoping, We dare to tread this moral sea.  On the verge of a racial abyss, Goaded on by coated words; Hot sparks fly and falling, hiss As our plough shares turn to swords.  Submitting no more as our forefathers Did in time of direst need, Determined, as the great storm gathers, Not a step must we recede.
__label__political He scans the world with calm and fearless eyes, Conscious within of powers long since forgot; At every step, new man-made barriers rise To bar his progress—but he heeds them not. He stands erect, though tempests round him crash, Though thunder bursts and billows surge and roll; He laughs and forges on, while lightnings flash Along the rocky pathway to his goal. Impassive as a Sphinx, he stares ahead— Foresees new empires rise and old ones fall; While caste-mad nations lust for blood to shed, He sees God's finger writing on the wall. With soul awakened, wise and strong he stands, Holding his destiny within his hands.
__label__political Bring to me your heart all bleeding When have I been known to mock men’s tears, To scoff at men because their hearts were full, Despise them in their grief? I am the Comforter. I make the lilies. I am the merciful. Hope in me. Bring unto me the wounds that throb, The sorrows of which you would not whisper. I have known tears myself. Tears cannot anger me. 
__label__political Better no Gods at all Than mere magicians Who stoop to conjurors' tricks and schemes Or better none. Than those that are born of pain and fear And but exist in anguish's dreams Yes, better none– by far Then those who can but rule While man remains a child, Dishonest or a fool. Again better none. Than that master of creation Who supports war, tyranny, and ambition By manipulation Give us a God or Gods-no matter. Who rules in every situation Omnipotent and dignified in every season And better than ever When man begins to reason.
__label__political Today--tomorrow And the day after tomorrow The song of the washboard Is beautiful to her ears And the water makes her hands Clean and white Like the hands of Jesus; The clothes on the line too Are clean and white and beautiful Like the robes of Jesus: Wrinkled old woman-- When Sunday comes  And the minister preaches About the beautiful robes of Jesus She will think about Mrs. Gregory's clothes White and beautiful on the line, White like the robes of Jesus. She will be happy because her hand are clean-- Clean like the hands of Jesus. 
__label__political They taught me to believe that God is white, That merit is alone found in this hue, But since calm hours attend the darkest night Why should I still believe such doctrine true?  They taught me that the angels are like snow, That colors save their white all virtues lack, But gazing on a swarthy sleeping babe Makes me believe that angels too are black. 
__label__political We stand for truth and right We're in to win the fight; God is our King. He loves humanity And will us liberty. He guides us on our way Both night and day.  We are an army strong; We fight for right, not wrong. God lead us on. We'll march to victory; Truth is our sword and shield. Let come what will or may, We're not dismayed.  Truth, right and love will stand The test in any land; God rules on high. So valiant soldiers brave, Triumphant, pave the way. To arm, the sword unsheathe For liberty.
__label__political What will the pink man say When this world is no more And a man no longer a man But a spirit impure Waiting at the court of his God To answer for the wrongs He did on the sod? What will the pink man say? What will his proud spirit say When his God should ask him: "How have you treated your brother, Your dark brother Jim?" Will he hang his haughty spirit head Remembering the tree And those that he bled? What will this proud spirit say?
__label__political The Negro in his blindness      Bows down to white men's gods, Content with crumbs of kindness      Or any other odds; Yet once his wits were duller,      Once, weaker his backbone; And at last the man of color      Stirs, and dreams about his own.
__label__political Damn everybody— White folks push me down Black  ones keep me there—” Then they say, “Keep him there—” But I’ll not be kept—d’ye hear? I’ll win though it take all my years— I'll win. 
__label__political Aunt Hagar’s children Ain't got no stockin’s on, stockin’s on, Aunt Hagar’s children Ain’t got no stockin’s on, ‘Tis trosty weather............ tis frosty weather too. Aunt Hagar’s children Got their feet on the ground, on the ground, Aunt Hagar’s children Got their feet on the ground, The snow is fallin .........  the snow is fallin’ down. Aunt Hagar’s children cin’t got no food to eat, food to eat, Aunt Hagzar’s children Ain't got no food to eat, An’ they is dyin’ ......... they is dyin’ now. Aurt Hagar’s children Ain't goin’ to live much mo’, much mo’, Aunt Hagar’s children Ain't goin’ to live much mo’, ’Tis time fo’ Jesus ............ fo' Jesus to look down. 
__label__political They call me! Ah, those never-ceasing winds! And they have called me through the centuries From those dim forests where the world begins, From golden, sun-kissed lands beyond the seas! Not bitter-breathing winds of ice and sleet, Not tranquil zephyrs, murmuring soft and low, But winds whose fierce caress is hot and sweet With passion pale men’s hearts can never know! Wild winds which whirled and danced across the plains, Which whistled through the lurid jungle morn, Which moaned among the hills their eerie strains Ten thousand years before the Sphinx was born! Strong winds which bore my fathers’ battle-cries, Which roused their hearts to love, or calmed to peace ;—  They call me! and within my spirit rise Fierce yearnings aye, that cannot, will not cease! And over countless leagues of swirling sea, Through all the years, I've heard their wild refrain, I’ve known the joy of their weird melody, The fierce, ecstatic tumult of their pain! And long as those impetuous winds shall blow, Though paler men may never feel their surge, My songs will bear their burthen! I shall know Their fervent, fiery passion and their urge! And though my spirit from that distant land A thousand miles, a thousand years may sever, I know those winds on that far, sun-warmed strand Will call me back forever and forever!
__label__political Out of the dust, out of the dirt and dust,  Came in the night, came in the darkest of nights, Being with beast, being as beast. Love to beast, love by beast. Night—a whip, a chain, a ship, more whip.  To the land of the free, to the free land.  Existing with beast, existing like beast. Hatred to beast, hated by beast. Dawn—a war, a peace, a freedom, more wars.  To be free, yet not to have freedom. Living with beast, living as beast. Scorn at beast, scorned by beast. Day—the New Negro.
__label__political All night they whine upon their ropes and boom Against the dock with helpless prows : These little ships that are too worn for sailing Front the wharf but do not rest at all. Tugging at the dim, grey wharf they think, No doubt, of China and of bright Bombay. And they remember islands of the East, Formosa, and the mountains of Japan They think of cities, ruined, by the sea And they are restless, sleeping at the wharf. Tugging at the dim, grey wharf they think No less of Africa. An east wind blows And salt spray sweeps the unattended decks. Shouts of dead men break upon the night. The captain calls his crew and they respond The little ships are dreaming—land is near. But mist comes up to dim the copper cast. Mist dissembles images of the trees. The captain and his men alike are lost. And their shouts go down in the rising sound of waves. * * * * *  Ah little ships, I know your weariness I know the sea-green shadows of your dream. For I have loved the cities of the sea, And desolations of the old days I Have loved: I was a wanderer like you And I have broken down before the wind.
__label__political My friend, you marvel how this thing can be, A blackened bard is told to sing; and | Am moved to supplement you: I muse why And when Apollo’s rare proclicity; How he can muster ample nerve to try This way of beauty, knowing full well, Ay! How, begging, Homer died. I dimly see, Since it is proved that dye of any hue Does not impair the essence of a thing. How two of equal gifts and chance may do An equal deed. Still I am marvelling— How one black poet ploughs the whole day long And burns the oil of midnight for a song.  
__label__political You build a slender shining bridge,    Mystically strong, Across the cleft of sorrows; it’s    A silver bridge of song. It spans the space of memories.    It meets the throne of grace,— It arches like a magic road    Above the rift of race.
__label__political The Law that spins these toy-top worlds in space, Divides the opaque darkness from the day, Directs the shining of each solar ray, Guides and controls the stellar chariot race, And holds the whirling universe in place— Altho no particle may stop or stay— This Law immutable, you may not sway, Or modify, or alter by your grace . . . Unfailingly the tides of ocean flow, The giant oaks and modest pansies grow, Inexorably following the deed Comes, without haste and without pause, the meed. A tiny tendril creviced in the rock In time mill burst apart a granite block.
__label__political Three centuries beneath your haughty heel, Humble and ignorant, debased and poor, Like mendicants before your temple-door, The potentates of earth have seen us kneel. With guileless art we made our mute appeal, And tho' you scorned and spurned us, tried the more To love and serve you better than before. Your children we have nursed, your daily meal Set forth, your crops have reaped, your acres tilled, Your burdens borne, your enemies have killed; We've given of our brawn unstintingly, And of our brain, when so you'd let it be. Remembering all, how can you lynch and hate, And with our quivering clay, your passion sate?
__label__political I saw a dark boy      Trudging on the road (Twas’ a dreary road Blacker than night).      Oft times he'd stumble And stagger 'neath his burden      But still he kept trudging Along that dreary road.  I heard a dark boy      Singing as he passed Oft times he'd laugh      But still a tear Crept thru his song,      As he kept trudging Along that weary road .  I saw a long white mist roll down      And cover all the earth (There wasn't even a shadow      To tell it was night). And then there came an echo . . . .  . . . . Footsteps of a dark boy Still climbing on the way.  A song with its tear      And then a prayer From the lips of a dark boy      Struggling thru the fog. Oft times I'd hear       The lashing of a whip And then a voice would cry to heaven      “Lord! . . . Lord!      Have mercy! . . . . mercy!” And still that bleeding body      Pushed onward thru the fog . Song . . . . Tears . . . . Blood . . . . Prayer      Throbbing thru the mist.  The mist rolled by      And the sun shone fair, Fair and golden      On a dark boy . . . . cold and still High on a bare bleak tree      His face upturned to heaven His soul upraised in song      “Peace. . . . Peace      Rest in the Lord.”  Oft times in the twilight      I can hear him still singing As he walks in the heavens,      A song without a tear A prayer without a plea.  Lord, lift me up to the purple sky      That lays its hand of stars Tenderly on my bowed head      As I kneel high on this barren hill. My song holds naught but tears      My prayer is but a plea Lord take me to the clouds      To sleep . . . to sleep. 
__label__political These men were kings albeit they were black:    Toussaint and Dessalines and L'Ouverture; Their majesty has made me turn my back    Upon a plaint I once shaped to endure. These men were black, I say, but they were crowned    And purple-clad, however brief their time. Stifle your agony, let grief be drowned;    We know joy had a day once and a clime. Dark gutter snipe, black sprawler-in-the-mud,    A thing men did a man may do again; What answer filters through your sluggish blood    To these dark ghosts who knew so bright a reign? "Lo, I am dark, but comely," Sheba sings;    "And we were black," three shades reply, "but kings." 
__label__political On dis mountain You can't find, A hammer wid a ring, A ring like mine. Ring, Jesus, Ring. Say on dis mountain You can't find, A hammer wid a ring, A ring like mine. Ring, Jesus, Ring. Mean on dis mountain You can't find, A hammer wid a ring, A ring like mine. Ring, Jesus, Ring
__label__political Jes moochin' along, Down de road. Jes moochin' along, Wid ma load. Turn to de Bible An' you will see, Down an' out folks Like you an' me. Jes moochin' along, Down de road. Jes moochin' along, Wid ma load. Dere was po' Mary A low down gal, Jesus tol' her I'm yo' pal. Jes moochin' along, Down de road. Jes moocliin' along, Wid ma load. Look at Daniel In de lions' den, Lions wouldn't bite Dem Christian men. Jes moochin' along, Down de road. Jes moochin' along, Wid ma load. Oh, I wilt fallow 'Till judgment day, 'Cause ma Lawd Leads de way. Jes moochin' along, Down de road. Jes moochin' along, Wid ma load.
__label__political He had taken a reed and made him stops And set it to his mouth, And was strolling along our careless street That follows the river south— A black boy and a reedy flute, A black child skipped behind— A white man, following, laughed and said, “This is a lucky find! That boy can swing a better pick Than any man at the Dam, But who'd a thought o° music and him! Lawd! any black boy can lam A tune out o° a cast iron pipe, Or a wooden railroad tie— If they couldn’t open up and sing Every last one ‘d die!” But I was plashing on the brink Of a sleepy river wide, Playing hide and seek in reeds That covered the shallow side; I was swinging from a vine That gripped a mighty tree, Higher and higher, pulsing, glad, A rhythm of eternity; I was dancing in a glade, The moon and | were mad, Till cool, dewed grass held quivering limbs And breath was the pain I had; I was lost in a night-black wood, And heard a clear birdsong: Dropping in weariness, I dreamt That walking I found the dawn— The reedy flute was under the hill, Each went back to his task. A black god caught us unaware, We dropped each needful mask Hiding the child-face that must light When a flute player passes by— “If they coula's open up and sing Every last one ’d die!”
__label__political If  I should go to sleep to-night Knowing I ne'er should waken, I would not be dismayed. My soul, glad for release , Would wing its way unto a long remembering  Of mornings spent upon the Siasconsett strand Watching the sun rise Dripping red spray from ocean's eastern rim. Of hours on Narragansett's craggy coast When, perched in solitude upon a rock, Feet dipping in the spray, I listened to the waves Beat their high sounding paean on the shore.  Of evenings in mid-ocean when the moon Laddered its path of gold From sky down o'er the waves To where I stood ship-bound Trying to quench undying thirst With wonder of the night.  Of dusk in distant balsam wood When nature poured her evensong From thrushes ' throat.  Of moments with a cardinal— He perched upon a swaying pine ,  I tip-toe on the sod— Talking to each other of happiness and God.  Of blue flags by a Carolina stream, Of dogwood tracing petals pink Against a silver sky.  Of flowers peeping through June snow at Scheideg; Of Spietz reflected in the Thunensee; Of English gardens And purple heather hemming in the Scottish lochs  Of Capri's grotto blue And cedars silhouetted against the Carmel sea. Of lacy spires etched against the sky Of Chartres and Senlis, St. Patrick's and Milan.  Of music in a child's unstudied laughter; Of unexpected handclasps by the way.  If I should go to sleep to-night Knowing I ne'er should waken I would not be dismayed. My pagan soul, if thus it be. Clothed only in such robes as these Would wing its way into Eternity Asking that afterlife be long enough For such remembering. 
__label__political These of the coal-black faces Confide, low-voiced, Fisherman, washerwoman, Quietly shutting themselves off From the pool-room loafers. Unbroken By the salt spume of the sea, Tight-lipped against the whispering fears of age, He holds her laughing. In his keen eyes The gleam of one who knows he must endure All shifting winds, And hate Of deep-embittered sons of slaving race, Must outreach The hunger of insatiate women, And broken nets at sea. Her brave face Softens in a smile  And light of youth's long hopes and passion Sunk away. But she has seasoned in her proper time And grown to mellow laughter. Strong, Like some far runner turning with new vigor Home. Now she is firm Against the tearings of untimely births, And sweating steam of clothes; Firm now, at last, Against the pleading smiles Of brutal, melancholy, Rich-voiced men. 
__label__political “Hey there, Bub! I say!” Silence. (“He knows my name.’’) “Hey George! This way!” Silence. (“Same, old, game.”) “Hey, darky! You!!” Silence. (“Same, old game.” ) “T’ll be damned if tain’t true! Nigger showing off, posing offense At a name. Do you think I’d ‘Mister’ you! Black beast! Any name For you'd be an honor. Who Looks at you, sees a cringing, tame  Beast. Intelligence! Bah! Blunt as pig iron. Black soul! What’s in you to respect! Ha! Ha! I could take the whole Of your race and dam the oceans with its refuse! Stinking flotsam! Black beast! God! Who has use For your carcass!”  So, at least, Was this white man’s thought.  But out of this stinking flotsam, God Wrought a young knighthood. Sworn to their vows, with flashing sword And dazzling shield, they stood— A new order of Negro Youth, eager For the quest of the Guarded Heights, God bade them, “Go forward! No meager Whims of men shall put to flight Your soul’s great force. Wear My favors, Vision and Love. Evil shall glower, a few shall dare To mock; but steadfast above All pettiness, you shall stand.  “New Negro, sing your soul's own song, Holy, majestic, grand. Your notes shall lead a jeering throng From baseness to nobility. Dip your gilt-edged pen in the wellspring Of your heart. With swift agility, Fling word on word to pierce and sting As the rapier thrust, men’s hearts. Your daring pen shall slowly lessen Studied, insidious plots Of prejudice and inhuman oppression. Open the flood-gate of your vivid soul. On crested waves of creative Genius, unveiled beauty shall roll Forth, to transform, to give New life to barren canvass. Men Shall gaze astounded and their Eager hands shall reach out then, Not to despoil, but to share, To possess the lofty inspiration Pure art alone can give.  “New Negro, in this generation You shall fully live. ‘The old order changeth’. Not Mold of face, nor color of skin Shall conquer the cruel heart Of race tyranny, or bigotry, its kin. They shall perish by your flashing sword Of ability. Your shield, brightly  Emblazoned with fine achievement, shall afford Invulnerable armor for unsightly Barbs of asinine abuse. Knights Of the order of New Negro Youth, You shall reach the Guarded Heights  With weapons of integrity and truth.” 
__label__political He gazed awed and mute As she wiggled her body To the tune of a flute. Down her bare back Dark tresses fell She danced like a demon On hot coals of hell. She covered her body In a veil of pale hue Because it was black It shone right through. "Dance on," he cried. "Dance on, fool, To your black feet Hot coals'll feel cool."
__label__political God made them very beautiful, the trees: He spoke and gnarled of bole or silken sleek They grew; majestic browed or very meek; Huge-bodied, slim; sedate and full of glees. And He had pleasure deep in all of these. And to them, soft and little tongues to speak Of Him to us, He gave; wherefore they seek From dawn to dawn to bring us to our knees. * * * * Yet here amid the wistful sounds of leaves, A black-hued grewsome something swings and swings Laughter it knew and joy in little things, Till man's hate ended all. —And so man weaves. And God, how slow, how very slow weaves He— Was Christ Himself not nailed to a tree?
__label__political I am Africa:      Black as the wealth of my coal mines,      Black as the murk of my midnight;      I built Timbuctoo and Karnak,—      The temples of Isis and Osiris,      The Alphabet  I am Africa:      I am the Sphinx and the Pyramids,      The rub and riddle of the universe,      Defying time and the elements.      Upon the bosom of my prairies      I shelter the caravan of nations,—      I lull them to sleep in my midnight,—      I bury them in my Saharas.      From the pinnacle of my pyramids      I laughed at the legions of Caesar.      Out of the night of my midnight      Arose the hut of the Zulu,      The wigwam and kraal of the Bushmen,      The dynasties of Rameses and the Pharaohs,      The palaces and temples of the Ptolemies.      My daughters were queens in old Sheba,      My sons were the kings of old Egypt;       On the banks of the Nile I have reared them,      In immortal art I embalmed them.  I am Africa:      Black as the night of my coal mines,      Black as the deep of my midnight,      Prometheus on the rock of adversity,      The nations I feed on my vitals,      I give food to the tables of monarchs,       My coal warms the palaces of princes,      My diamonds deck the bosoms of queens,—      The queens in the palaces of London,      The salons of Brussels and of Paris,      The salons of Berlin   I am Africa:      On the fertile banks of the Congo      My sorrow in song I have lifted;      In the cane brakes and cornfields of Texas      My sorrow songs still I am singing,      I sleep ’neath the stars in the jungle,      I am brother to the beasts and the leopard,      The lion’s strength moves in my sinews,      In my bones is the iron of my Africa.      I worship the life-giving sunlight,      Oblations I give to the moon,      My gods are of stone and of iron—      No greater than these have I found.      I build temples which I may not enter,      I garner the harvest but eat not;      I gather the cotton in the Southland,—      Give grist to the mills in the Northland,—  I am Africa:      I laid down my life at Fort Pillow,      My blood’s on the Common of Boston;      I died on the flag at Fort Wagner,      My bones lie bleaching in Flanders.       They lynch me and burn me in Georgia,      My body is fuel in Texas,      They jim-crow me even in Washington,       They mock me even from the White House.      Black as the wealth of my coal mines,       Black as high noon of my midnight,—      I am the nimbus of nations, I am Africa.  
__label__political A cowering figure Clutching a cross Enters Heaven By the back way. 
__label__political Within my pulses beat a thousand dawns. Flushed with the fire of jungles; pride of a race Begotten of dark chieftains, lithe with the grace Of somber jungle-trees; doomed to be pawns Of defter, shrewder peoples than they were. Joy in a heritage of color and flame, Dancing and song that death can never claim,— All these within my pulses beat and stir And mingle with an ominous intent, Born out of distant silence, from the heart Of that far shrewder people arrogant, And cooly sure, who play the kingly part. I saw a malamute, once, strain and cry Between the pack and team. Lo, it was I.  
__label__political The Black Minstrel Sings :— You Ain’t been there, brother? Don’t tell me so! “...Tell ’im ‘bout it...tell ‘im bout it…” Han’ me ma sax An’ lemme go ‘Taint nothin’ to ‘im Lemme tell ’im so— Han’ me ma sax An’ lemme go... Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Boody...see hootchiepep Hootchiepep...See boody— ...I'll sing ’im ’bout it—  Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Niggers, Jigs an’ shiney spades Highbrowns, yallers, fagingy-fagades “ …Oh say it, brother Say it...” Pullman porters, shipping clerks an’ monkey chasers Actors, lawyers, Black Jews an’ fairies Ofays, pimps, low-downs an’ dicties Cabarets, gin an’ number tickets All mixed in With gangs o’churches— Sugar-foot misters an’ sun-dodgin’ sisters Don’t get up Till other folks long in bed... …Hey!...Hey! “Say it, brother Say it...” My gal’s A Sealskin brown Hot lips And sweet, O God! Uh... huh, But ma gal’s A white gal Das’ all…  Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Souls of Black Folk Ask Du Bois Little grey restless feet Ask Claude McKay City of Refuge Ask Rudolph Fisher Don’t damn your body’s itch Ask Countee Cullen Does the jazz band sob? Ask Langston Hughes Nigger Heaven Ask Carl Van Vechten Hey!...Hey! Sing ’im "bout it “ ...Say it, brother Say it…” 
__label__political Can I in pride mock these buffoons Who ape ancestral circumstance? My fathers, too, these thousand moons Cavorted in some tribal dance. I still can feel, when drumbeats call The pulsing blood new rhythms take; As garment-like refinements fall Unconscious longings spring awake! My honored father, too would say, For all his solemn, high degrees, That drums recall Nigerian play And drown out later dignities. Few named tribesmen now remain To dance the sacred dance for rain! 
__label__political The faint lose faith When in the tomb their all is laid And there returns No echoing of weal or woe; The strong hope on— They see the clouds close over head, The grass grow green, No word is said, And yet—  A little world within the world Are we, Daily our heart’s high yearnings fade, Are buried! Then, new ones are made, Are crucified! And yet—  
__label__political I'm awake, I'm away! I have jewels in trust, They are rights of the soul That are holy and just; There are deeds to be done, There are goals to be won, I am stripped for the race In the glare of the sun. I am throbbing with faith, I can! And I must! My forehead to God— My feet in the dust.
__label__political Her eyes had caught a bit of loveliness— A flower blooming in the prison yard. She ran to it and pressed it to her lips, This Godsend of a land beyond the walls; She drank its divine beauty with her kiss— A guard wrested the flower from her hand, With awful art, her humble back laid bare— Soft skin, and darker than a dreamless night; He tossed aside the burden of her hair. “I'll teach you to pick flowers in this yard. They ain't for niggers.” He began to flog. Her pale palmed hands grasped the thin air in quest. Until, like two antalgic words, they fell, And whispered something to her bleeding breast. And she forgot the misery of her back. Somehow she knew that God, HER God was there— Thai what was pain was but her striped flesh. Her soul, inviolate, was havened in prayer. On a cross of bigotry she was crucified Because she was not white. And like her Father On the holyrood, whispered, “Forgive”. And in her eyes there shone a Candlemas light. He flung the whip into the flower bed, He did not even note that she was dead. 
__label__political Three centuries of cries and groans beat thru my brain, Three centuries of toil and sweat for others’ gain. Of burdens carried thru upland, desert, plain— Cruel burdens, cutting flesh and making muscle strain. Tomorrow, yesterday, today we toil and toil in vain, Three centuries of cries and groans; -- monotonous refrain.  
__label__political Speak kindly of her, who was kind to all,    Whose genial presence is with us no more; Far o'er the vale I hear her spirit call,    And see the Ghost-ship speeding from the shore. She spent her life in service to her kind,    Inspiring Youth each worthwhile task to try, Making them strong in body, firm in mind,    And by example held their standard high. Four-square and upright to the winds she stood,    And nobly fought the problems of her Race; Her kindly nature, sterling motherhood    She gave-a heritage to Time and Place. Her soul up-rising throws an earthward glance And still we hear her call, "Advance! Advance!"
__label__political Soul of the brave, beside thy tomb we pause    To voice thy praise at thy centenary Lincoln's right hand in Freedom's flowering cause,    Which raised a nation out of slavery; In the dark hour the people looked to thee,    When North and South in bloody conflict clashed. Thou delt'st the blow that crushed the conquering Lee    As a huge wave against a cliff is dashed, Magnanimous in triumph--nobly scored,    And won the highest honor of the state. Thine act of chivalry redeemed the sword,    A man of sympathy, sublimely great. Today thy name in loving praise we chant,    A nation's idol--the immortal Grant.
__label__political While Satan plied his whip and held the rein,    And knaves and tyrants ruled the market-place,    There gloating o'er the miseries of a race Trading in human flesh for private gain; He heard the moans of slvaes to heaven ascend    And saw men prostrate, wreathed in grime and mud;    It made the Moon in agony wring blood And caused his heart to melt, his breast to rend. He wept to see the country that he loved    Cursed with disease, slow-dying at the core,    To see hounds fattening on the human gore And his revolting soul with ,pity moved.    He caught the vision of a brighter day     And like a flaming meteor blazed the way. 
__label__political Black Sampson is a singing man;      He’s blind and big and strong. A steel guitar is in his hands,      And in his mouth, a song.  He shuffles up and down the streets,      Led by a little child; His voice is vibrant, deep and loud,      Like the sea when the winds are wild.  There’s sunshine, laughter, pain, and tears,      In the songs black Sampson sings— The slave’s sad wail, the warrior’s shout,      And the laughter of rippling springs.  There’s something in his voice that clings,      Like Ethiopia’s arms, Which holds the strength of Pyramids,      And great Sahara’s charms. When Sampson sings he holds the throng      With the spell of his magic bars, Which thrill like the sound of tom-tom drums,      On the Congo, under the stars. 
__label__political As flower dust is driven down the wind To touch and quicken the green life of earth, As birds spread wings and leave cold lands ‘behind, For regions of sweet warmth and singing mirth: So shall thy thought be carried surely forth To the remotest dwellings of mankind, Reaching its inmost self to give new birth, New strength, new purpose to man’s boundless mind.  The birds of time shall wing thee down the ways Of man’s abode. Thy progress will be keen Against the heavy mist of stormy days, As ever progress through the years has been. Even as strong-winged messengers are seen, In these amazing times with fine amaze, Threading the tides of space that roll between The earth and heavens that ever hold man’s gaze.  The nations will be stricken at thy word, And grand old prejudices crumble down, That ancient pride in warring breasts has stirred. The noblest men shall work for any renown. Thy truest heralds do not fear the frown Of legioned bigots leagued by fear and spurred To crush thy truth, but more the shouting clown, The standard-flocking of the sheeplike herd. 
__label__political The persecuted make obeisance to many gods, Many unanswering gods— Gods who turn deaf ears To the prayers of the earth’s disinherited, Who hear not the mumbled plaints of voiceless pariahs  Abased at the feet of the gods of their despoilers.  Not for dumb driven diggers of ditches, Not for dust-choked pickers of cotton, Nor straining loaders of carriers, Not for the fettered multitudes That worship at their shrines Do the gods perform their miracles.  Seeking balms for their sores The persecuted receive but the sting of irritants; Seeking contentment, but the bitterness of denial. With wounds recrudescent, With minds uncontent They turn yet To the gods of the privileged.  And the gods? In their cloistered sanctuaries The worshipped stare with poker faces At the antics of the dust.  The gods of the persecuted are many But unanswering. 
__label__political Though blacker flows the blood within these veins And darker-hued this welted human back, A whiter soul I own than they who seek To purge their sins upon a flaming pyre. Though crinkled mat this hair upon my head, And coarser features mark this face of night,- I still can laugh with Fate and dream my dreams, I still can dream my dreams!
__label__political Whence have we come? We know but that God made man, And that Africa is a land of jungies– We know too  That nights have been dark And like a million stars We have grinned Thru them all.  It is strange That we should know Love, We who have gasped for breath Amid poisonous fumes of hate And have sucked The bitter breast of scorn; It is strange That we too Should know the joy Of kisses.  Our mouths have sung The Lord’s song In a strange land, And our harp strings have vibrated With new tunes.  We must find a new prayer To pray, The same words have grown dull  To the ears of God: We must find a new prayer  For the God of the sun  And steel girders, We must build stronger altars To the God of skyscrapers.  How quickly this dream has ended! Palm trees are waving On the banks of the Congo Where grass huts still hide dusky bodies From the sun; And there are voices Crying aloud in the wilderness— There are voices in the jungles  That echo thru the night As ours did Long ago. 
__label__political Gather the stars together    In one corner of the sky, Let swift hammers beat the golden loveliness Of the moon Into a thousand fragments of nothingness. Let unseen hands strip the firmament Of its gray cloud garments And lay bare before all The ebon splendor of a black woman’s breast;.    Oh, the bosom of night is beautiful And dark like the breasts of a mammy!    Beautiful and dark and soft    Like the breasts of Ethiopia.
__label__political Bravely, we bade farewell to the old      And entered the trend of the new;  Never to falter, faint or fail,       Upward and onward, steady and true.  Though at times the path be dim,      Hatred and malice pierce the soul,  We stand with not a shred of fear,      Facing the new, "warriors bold."  Peace on earth, good will toward men,       Should be a beacon light,  A welcome warmth in every heart,      Piercing the gloom like a ray in the night. Shall we revive the "Golden Rule"       That long since has grown cold, And let the cup of bitterness      Be relics of the old? 
__label__political A Black bird flutters from its nest, A Black child toddles down its path, And each is born to sing. The Black bird neither reaps nor spins,— A carefree singer in the sun, It sings a carefree song. The Black child smiles to dam the tears And pathos hidden in its face, And wills to sing or die.
__label__notpolitical Far up in the cathedral, so they tell ,    There lived the lonely hunch-back all day long    No thought but of the church -bells, great and strong, And deaf but feeling full the chorus swell:— 'Tis holiday! O! come! my Gabrielle!    And all the rest of ye, pour out your song!    Why stand ye idle, lagging there? Ding! dong! O! Thibauld, sound your deep, reverberant cell! O! Sparrows, yield the sweetness that ye bring!    O! Pasquier, forth your piping music hurl       To th' multitude below, and all earth fill! Awake! awake! awake to life and sing!    But lo! behold ! she comes, the dancing girl!       The ringer's heart leaps, but the bells are still .
__label__notpolitical As visions of the past, by memory led, From every opening vista crowd the mind, Till all our present duties fade---have fled, And Time rolls back to years far, far behind; If, by some strange enchantment we could be Then winged from matrons, back again to youth, Would we return once more to girlhood's glee Would we return? I ask. Pray, speak the truth!       Would you return?  Would you recall to earth, from peaceful sleep . Fond parents; have them break their heavenly rest, To toil again, to watch, to mourn, to weep O'er cares and troubles, only you know best? Would you return to fleeting youth again, And hush the prattle in your baby's cot Aft' all these years of care, of toil, of pain? A mother's feeling tells me I would not        Would you---return?
__label__notpolitical Of that same swarthy tint and hue, Of tales as thrilling and as true,    A pretty Desdemona He needs but then to tell them to,    To be a happy owner.  Of that same swarthy tint and hue, Of tales as thrilling and as true,    I am the happy owner; But I care not to tell them to A pretty Desdemona;    Some colored maid will do. 
__label__notpolitical Again is heard the crying of the children in the night, They are praying to the Father to defend their legal right, They are praying him for justice swift against illegal might, Their race is marching on.  These children of the nation now are growing wise and strong, They have suffered long in silence, under selfish Southern wrong, But they know that rank injustice has been meted to them long, Their race is marching on.  Their rights by constitution have been quibbled quite away, The ballot taken from them so they ne'er can have fair play; They're accused and without trial are strung up the selfsame day, But their race is marching on.  It's "lynch 'em, lynch 'em, lynch 'em, there's no law for black men here," "Tar and feather, shoot, and burn 'em, there is nobody to fear;" "This is the white man's country and no niggers wanted near," But their race is marching on.  God's eye doth aye behold them, there's no "color line " on high, His ear is open to them, He hears every sob and cry; He sits in righteous judgment, every soul that sins shall die, Their race is marching on.  The mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small, It cost a millions lives or more to make the shackles fall; 'Twill cost a million lives again, the wormwood and the gall, Their race is marching on. 
__label__notpolitical O you who wrote your sounding line On Shakespeare's mighty mind and heart, Before the time of Goethe's art Delivering the sisters nine, What measures can such lips as mine Unto your further fame impart, Within whose soul a song did start, Even when you sank in Omar's wine? With Barabas I count my gold, And delve in murders manifold; With Tamburlaine I rule the world, And then with Faust to hell am hurled; I hear the steady onward tramp Of armies on the battle-plain ; And then I feel the dew and damp, And rest forever with the slain. With you I tramp the London street, And see the good and evil there; With you a demon's curse repeat, Then up to glory I repair; For if there is a heaven to win, Above the ken of mortal eyes, Why wander in the ways of sin, Beyond the pale of Paradise ? I often wonder when I read These tales of vast and vague desire, How happy are those mortals freed From such excess of love and fire, But when I think of this man's state, And all his meeds of joy and pain My rising faith o'er comes my fate, And turns the harp of life again.
__label__notpolitical And so thou'rt gone, O brother to the night! After the years of waiting and the pain, After the striving and the stress thou'rt gone! After the pulsing heart-throb and the fret, The quick reward, the sudden voice of fame, The noisy clamor of a great world's praise, The great far-sight into the heart of things, Thou'rt gone, and wilt be with us here no more. We loved thee, brother, in this nether light, With hearts more full of love than we did dream; We loved thy voice, thy work, they heart, thy hope, Thy aspiration and enlightened view, We loved thee in the darkness of the year When thou didst tread the borderland of death; And love thee now with that far greater love That beckons us to thy eternal light. And when in some far-off hereafter day The voice of Fame shall speak her last decree, When she shall summon from the wreck of worlds The names that Time's great movement shall defeat, And when then she shall stand beside thy tomb, The laurel in her hand, and think on thee, Tis then will be thy word upon the scroll: He voiced the yearning of a people's soul. 
__label__notpolitical There came a dark youth singing in the dawn Of a new freedom, to a mellow lyre, Refining, as with touch of an Apollo's fire, The songs a lowly people sang upon A toilsome way. The night of gloom was gone; He stood, full-throated, cheering son and sire To garner grain, despising rain and mire Of yesternight. "To-day," he sang, "toil on And up, my race, from vale toward glory's crest!" Men marvelled at the singer, strong and sweet. He left the forest, drenched with storms of night, And faced the morning, beautiful with light, To die while shadows still fell toward the west, And leave his laurels at a people's feet.
__label__notpolitical Rock-a-bye, baby, sleep on my breast,    Nothing can harm thee here; Rock-a-bye, baby, may sweet be thy rest,    Angels are hov'ring near.       Sleep, baby, sleep,       While watch I keep,       Father is lost on the deep.  Rock-a-bye, baby, so free now thou art,    Peace now has come to thee, Would that my sorrow like thine would depart    No more to trouble me.       Sleep, baby, sleep,       While watch I keep,       Father is lost on the deep  Rock-a-bye, baby, my dear little beam,    Fast now and prone in sleep, Care ever calleth across my dream    O'er thy fond pleasures creep.       Sleep, baby, sleep,       While watch I keep,       Father is lost on the deep.  Rock-a-bye, baby, soon labor will call    Call me away from thee; He will care for thee who careth for all,    Sweet will our union be.       Sleep, baby, sleep,       While watch I keep,       Father is lost on the deep. 
__label__notpolitical His life so earthly to be spent, The greatest singer of his race His Lyre, a self-made instrument, But 'twas not commonplace; It murmured sweetly his folk lore In cadence all could understand; But then, again, his lyre could soar To heights most truly grand.  He loved his race, and sought to raise  It to a nobler, higher plane; Such was the burden of his praise Aye! even the refrain, One needs but to recall his verse That gladdens Ethiop's sorrowings Aye! one may say the universe -- Tis' "When Malindy Sings."   His "Strength of Gideon" is a strength To many halting brothers 'ways; Its fruitage will appear at length By bringing helpful, peaceful days. Although the Poet has gone hence His cheerful songs with us remain At once aglorious recompense-- He has not lived in vain.
__label__notpolitical WE hear of divers sayings, Read proverbs full of truth; To greatest age we hear them, From adolescent youth.  But that which shames all knowledge, And Reason doth impeach, Is this: "The white man's burden," Which o'er the world they preach.  Boasting of Christian goodness, Of Law and Equity, They fail to live their learning Of Moral probity.  From glutted town and province Where fortunes are denied, They sail the wide, wide ocean, Till they our shores have spied.  Thither they head: and landing With strange timidity, Receive our native kindness And hospitality.  Returning with the presents Of gold and priceless They call our lands benighted, And would their depths explore.  Our lands of dual greatness, Fertility and gold;— They confiscate and claim them With lying tongues so bold.  Their doctrines then, they teach us, Which eager we imbibe; But find them inconsistent, And shameful to our tribe.  They rob our gold and diamonds, With arms' defying power; And to our greatest sorrow, Our virgins they deflower.  And this, "the white man's burden!" To plunder, kill, deflower! Lay waste our Native glory, And falsely it endower!  Is this the heavy "burden" Throughout the world we hear? Aye! this the boasted "burden" Theft, Falsehood, Arms, and Fear!  Such arrant blatant boastings Contaminate our ear; Such arrant blatant boastings We hear from year to year!  And yet we hear them calmly, Resigning all our fate, To that great Power and Spirit, Who Times and men placate.  Ye sons of Ethiopia, Less boastful nations, all-- Courage! for soon such "greatness" Will totter, reel, and fall.  Ye Presidents and Princes, Who guide the stately helms, Kings of great tribes and peoples, Throughout the world -wide realms,  Behold the rank injustice To Ethiop's ebon sons; The lash, the whip, the wailings, The very blood that runs!  And this, "the white man's burden!"-- To plunder, kill, deflower! Lay waste our Native glory, And falsely it endower. 
__label__notpolitical When the evening shadows fall Darkly over the crowded street , From the nursery , through the hall , Comes the sound of little feet. Sweet the hour at close of day , When my baby comes to me, Putting all her toys away , Climbing eager to my knee . Presses tender lips to mine , Nestles fondly on my breast ; Loving arms about me twine --- How she loves to be caress'd ! Little hands so warm and soft ; Sweet brown eyes and tresses , too ; Cooing voice that murmurs oft , "Mamma , mamma , I do love 'oo!" Oh! my precious little girl--- Priceless gift you are to me ! Earth affords no richer pearl , Life and love abound in thee.
__label__notpolitical Here on this festal day Our hearts are light and free, The clouds have rolled away, And shines fair liberty.  CHORUS.  Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah for the flag, The bonny, bonny blue! Hurrah! Hurrah! for the flag! Through which the bullets flew!  All praise to Thee, O God, All praise to Thee who broke The fetters and the rod Of slavery's galling yoke. CHORUS  All honor to the true, The men who fought and died, The boys who wore the blue Their country's love and pride. CHORUS  We honor, too, the men Who steered the ship of State, They gave their tongue and pen To stay the hand of fate.  The women too must share The glory of this day It is their answered prayer,  The clouds are rolled away. СHORUS. 
__label__notpolitical Shakespeare wuz a poet, Dat had a pop'lar name, I recken eberybody Hab heard ob his great fame.  He useter talk 'bout honor An 'writ erbout hit's worth, Said a good name wuz better Dan enyting on earth.  Said houses, lands, an' all sich t'ings Yas! I t'ink he took in cash,— W'an't de objec' ob dis life, He simply called 'em trash.  He eben went far 'nuff ter say. An ' bout hit he wuz sho', By takin' al' his wealth fum him Yer couldn't make 'im po.'  "De precious jewel uv my sol' Am ma name "he useter squall, "An' him dat steals dat 'way fum me Hab robbed me uv my all."  I hate ter spute dat gent'mun, Er call to him to halt Hits mighty strange fer me ter be Wid him a findin' fault.  But ef he wuz libin' now An' seen t'ings mov' erlong, An' seen des what's a-gwine on, He'd sing ernudder song.  Dat t'ing is dun been turned eroun', De name am now de trash, An' ter make one po' in dis good day You're got ter steal his cash. 
__label__notpolitical A mighty temple raised in the air,    With piles of jewels, heaps of stone, Ionic columns large and fair      And great Diana on her throne --  Such splendor did Demetrius Bestow on ancient Ephesus. And this was once the glorious scene      Of miles on miles of gilded things; But now where once a famous queen     Did reign, dull Silence sits and sings; Of all the pomp that once was known  Scarce lingers now one stone on stone.           Once here on this benighted spot     Whose living live less than its dead, A multitude did pray and plot,      Urged on by what a preacher said; And men before God's throne did fall When once they heard the words of Paul. A heathen emperor's stern behest,     Seven Christian brothers doomed to die, Two hundred years in Coelian's breast,     No thought of time that flitted by-- Such was the wonder of the spell These youth awoke one day to tell. A kingdom of the ancient world,     The arms of Persia and of Rome, Ten thousand souls to Hades hurled,     And a world-conqueror's dream of home-- Such glory once the world did see; But Alexander-- where is he? And where is all the mighty host      That on Olympus sang and strove?  Where are the gods those peaks did boast?     Where now is Dian? Where is Jove? All- all in Time's great bosom sleep; Such secrets doth Oblivion keep. 
__label__notpolitical Little maid of gentle mien, In all the wide, wide world, I ween There beats no kinder, purer heart Than thine, so free from guile and art, My own sweet girl, Elizabeth.  Thou hast the charm, loved one, that lies In wavy locks and shining eyes; But, God be thanked that in thy face I find a more than earthly grace;— My noble girl, Elizabeth!  Serene, sincere, unselfish, true A glimpse of Heaven in thee I view; Thy presence chases care away And turns the darkest night to day, My daughter dear, Elizabeth.  I ask not that the future bring The things whose praises worldlings sing: Nor wealth, nor name, nor power e'en These gifts of earth I count too mean To crave for thee, Elizabeth.  God keep thee through the coming days, Let modest worth crown all thy ways; To serve where needed be thy aim; Thy goal the truth, instead of fame I pray for thee, Elizabeth.
__label__notpolitical I am a Negro, but I sing and sing,    Burning with kiss divine that made me so.    O brother mortal, likest to the snow, Turn not in coldness from the song I bring, But listen to my lyre's low murmuring,    Where down the cypresses I sadly go,    Through deepening twilight, lest the faint winds know The secret of some tender little thing That haunts and haunts me, and they tell it all--    All, all my sorrows and ambitious, too. For these 'oercome me; these, through dreamy fall,    Keep calling, calling; beckoning, as to you: 'Up! Sing the song! Men shall forget your race, Nor blush to keep the image of your face.'
__label__notpolitical I am dead; Yet somehow, somewhere, In Time's weird contradiction, I  May tell of that dread deed, wherewith I brought to Children of the Moon  Freedom and vast salvation.  I was a woman born And trod that streaming street That ebbs and flows from Harlem's hills Thro' caves and canyons limned in light Down to the twisting sea.  That night of nights I stood alone and at the End Until the sudden highway to the Moon, Golden in splendor, Became too real to doubt.  Dimly I set foot upon the air; I fled, I flew, thro' thrills of light, With all about, above, below the whirring Of almighty wings. I found a twilight land Where, hardly hid, the sun Sent softly saddened rays of Red and brown to burn the iron earth And bathe the snow-white peaks In mighty splendor.  Black were the men, Hard haired and silent slow, Moving as shadows Bending with face of fear to earthward; And women there were none.  "Woman, woman, woman!" I cried in mounting terror. "Woman and Child!" And the cry sang back Thro' Heaven with the Whirring of almighty wings.  Wings, wings, endless wings, Heaven and earth are wings; Wings that flutter, furl and fold, Always folding and unfolding, Ever folding yet again; Wings, veiling some vast And veiled face, In blazing blackness, Behind the folding and unfolding, The rolling and unrolling of Almighty wings!  I saw the black men huddle Fumed in fear, falling face downward; Vainly I clutched and clawed, Dumbly they cringed and cowered, Moaning in mournful monotone:    O Freedom, O Freedom,    O Freedom over me;    Before I'll be a slave    I'll be buried in my grave    And go home to my God    And be free.  It was as angel music From the dead, And ever, as they sang, The winged Thing of wings, filling all Heaven, Folding and unfolding, and folding yet again, Tore out their blood and entrails 'Til I screamed in utter terror And a silence came: A silence and the wailing of a babe  Then at last I saw and shamed; I knew how these dumb dark and dusky things Had given blood and life To fend the caves of underground The great black caves of utter night Where earth lay full of mothers And their babes.  Little children sobbing in darkness. Little children crying in silent pain. Little mothers rocking and groping and struggling, Digging and delving and groveling Amid the dying-dead and dead-in-life. And drip and dripping of warm, wet blood Far, far beneath the wings. The folding and unfolding of almighty wings.  I bent with tears and pitying hands Above these dusky star-eyed children. Crinkly haired, with sweet-sad baby voices Pleading low for light and love and living— And I crooned:     Little children weeping there,    God shall find thy faces fair;    Guerdon for thy deep distress.    He shall send His tenderness;    For the tripping of thy feet    Make a mystic music sweet    In the darkness of thy hair;    Light and laughter in the air—    Little children weeping there.    God shall find thy faces fair!  I strode above the stricken bleeding men. The rampart 'ranged against the skies. And shouted: "Up I say, build and slay; Fight face foremost, force a way, Unloose, unfetter and unbind; Be men and free."  Dumbly they shrank Muttering they pointed toward that peak Than vastness vaster, Whereon a darkness brooded, "Who shall look and live," they sighed; And I sensed The folding and unfolding of almighty wings  Yet did we build of iron, bricks and blood; We built a day, a year, a thousand years. Blood was the mortar,blood and tears And, ah, the Thing, the Thing of wings, The winged folding wing of Things, Did furnish much mad mortar For that tower.  Slow and ever slower rose the towering task And with it rose the sun. Until at last on one wild day, Wind-whirled, cloud-swept and terrible. I stood beneath the burning shadow Of the peak. Beneath the whirring of almighty wings While downward from my feet Streamed the long line of dusky faces And the wail of little children sobbing under Earth.  "Freedom! " I cried. "Freedom! " cried Heaven, Earth and Stars, And a Voice near-far Amid the folding and unfolding of Almighty wings Answered "I am Freedom— Who sees my face is free— He and his."  I dared not look; Downward I glanced on deep bowed heads and closed eyes, Outward I gazed on flecked and flaming blue— But ever onward, upward flew The sobbing of small voices; Down, down, far down into the night.  Slowly I lifted livid limbs aloft; Upward I strove: The Face, the Face ; Onward I reeled: The Face, the Face! To Beauty wonderful as sudden death Or horror horrible as endless life— Up! Up! the blood-built way (Shadow grow vaster! Terror come faster!) Up ! Up to the blazing blackness Of one veiled face And endless folding and unfolding, Rolling and unrolling of Almighty wings: The last step stood! The last dim cry of pain Fluttered across the stars— And then—  Wings, wings, triumphant wings, Lifting and lowering, waxing and waning, Swinging and swaying, twirling and whirling, Whispering and screaming, streaming and gleaming, Spreading and sweeping and shading and flaming— Wings, wings, eternal wings, 'Til the hot red blood Flood fleeing flood, Thundered thro' Heaven and mine ears While all across a purple sky The last vast pinion Trembled to unfold.  I rose upon the Mountain of the Moon; I felt the blazing glory of the Sun. I heard the Song of Children crying "Free!" I saw the Face of Freedom— And I died. 
__label__notpolitical LISTEN, O ISLES!*  [An appreciation of the Philippine Constabulary Band, organized by a Negro, Captain Loving, through the suggestion of former President Taft.]    I.  Swirled over-most by Titan winds that toss Their limbs and ringlets in the eddying air. Like death-loosed poets, with their breeze-blown hair, Hymning to mountains, precipice and palm, Or sighing soft as Seraph's evening psalm— Startled by storm burst; stilled in love's deep loss, Listen, O Dream Isles of the Orient Main, Thy brown elves wake and pour lost Eden's choral strain!   II. Thrilled by brown magi from the nymphean coves. Old nations sing as if the centuries Sighed to the stars some old, lost planet's love; Now Egypt breathes: now Babylon, Persia, Greece, Through these soft pipes, wake, sighing, like the groves Where gods have wandered, and where winds are whispering "Peace." But hear the flute's sweet eccentricities 'Neath the white moon, you castled stream above, Till crash of cymbals, turban'd Turks have known, And sound's fine rain, and booming of deep drums, (And the brown gnome who pursueth wind gusts through Old Triton's wreathed shell, he wakes anew— Bellowing, like Neptune's rage, with much ado), Drown, with their ocean roar, the little bird Whose notes, like dainty Ariel's, laughed that they were heard. Was it Adonis, wandering alone, Waked, with sweet lips, the silver piccolo, Fair Music's nightingale, which sang: "Mine own, Mine own, dear Love, dost thou not know; not know?" Now, o'er the hills, is it Apollo comes, Pouring (oh, hear!) sound's golden honey down could drown Those silver reeds whose notes go down to some Well's bottom, over crystal rocks?Oh, come! Hear music ripple, like a breeze that's blown O'er ripening fields and Daphne's rosy vale, Full, deep and resonant! Hear this rose gale Of June's sweet Calliope wake, and all The muses rouse from dreamy murmurings! Hear shout and revel; romp and tipsy call Of woodland fairies. List! What siren sings O'er ocean voicings— deep, divinely deep! What billowed tempests rage; what surge and sweep; What equal thunderings storm Poseidon's throne, And sound Earth's black abyss! Now Ares fires The clouds, and far his awful symphony fills The world. 'Tis war! Embattled Harmony Sends Echo flying, golden, to the hills, To win brave heights where the winged eagle tires. And oh! the battle music rageth gloriously! Till, victory won, a last loud bar begins With roll of kettledrums, like boom of bees that drone, On heavy wings, down sultry summer winds, And unmolested bays where love sees one white sail.   III.  And what of him who leads these happy fauns? This Afric' Pan who broke the crystal lip Of Sound's lost river; plashed there, and let drip Thy soul, O Islands, mystical and sweet, Through reeds that bowed and nodded at Taft's feet, Fair and unbroken, 'mid the clamorous Dawn's Cry and appealings? Courage, O my race!  Courage and patience, Islands; ye shall yet have place!   * Written at the suggestion of Dr. W. Bishop Johnson, of Washington, D. C.  
__label__notpolitical Dusky lashes droop and fall, Night-winds whisper, night-birds call. Close your tired sleepy eyes, Earth is singing lullabies, Kindly twilight shadows creep O’er a world that longs for sleep, Little dusky babe of mine Close those sleepy eyes of thine, Mother’s love will softly keep  Watch above you while you sleep, Cruel hate and deadly wrong Cannot silence mother’s song Though against thy soft brown cheek She may hide her face and weep. Sleep, brown baby, while you may Peacefully, at close of day. Oh, that mother’s love could guard, Keep thee safe ‘neath watch and ward From the cruelly deadly things  That await thee while she sings. Prejudice and cold white hate: These, my baby, these, thy fate, Little, gentle, trustful thing,  Thus, these sobs, the while I sing.  
__label__notpolitical I thought how ofte the great gray god of years, Swinging adown the dark abysm of time, Some lamp portentous in the dimness rears, Some taper high, ineffable, sublime: Now darts a gleam faint thrilling through the deep, And now a glimmer from archangels' wings; And then once more the mighty aeons sleep, Lost in the slumber that the darkness brings; And then I creamed of one Promethean light, That, throbbing, as a mystic searchlight blazed Through all the caverns. Nature leaped in might To greet the signal from the rampart raised; Her innocent heart at last a flame inquired; And one by one all other lights expired.  
__label__notpolitical Take up the Black Man’s burden— Send forth the worst ye breed, And bind our sons in shackles To serve your selfish greed.  To wait in heavy harness, Be-deviled and beguiled Until the Fates Remove you From a world you have defiled.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— Your lies may still abide To veil the threat of terror, And check our racial pride;  Your cannon, church and courthouse May still our sons constrain To seek the white man’s profit And work the white man’s gain.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— Reach out and hog the earth, And leave your workers hungry In the country of their birth.  Then, when your goal is nearest, The end for which you fought, Watch Teuton trained efficiency Bring all your hope for nought.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— Reduce their chiefs and kings To toil of serf and sweeper, The lot of common things.  Sodden their soil with slaughter Ravish their lands with lead; Go, sign them with your living And seal them with your dead.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— And keep your old reward; The curse of those ye cozen, The hate of those ye barred  From your Canadian cities And your Australian ports; And when they ask for meat and drink, Go, girdle them with forts.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— Ye cannot stoop to less. Will not your fraud of freedom Still cloak your greediness?  But, by the gods ye worship, And by the deeds ye do, These silent, sullen peoples Shall weigh your gods and you.  Take up the Black Man’s burden— Until the tale is told, Until the balances of hate Bear down the beam of gold.  And while ye wait, remember That Justice, though delayed, Will hold you as her debtor, till The Black Man’s debt is paid.
__label__notpolitical The dreams of the dreamer Are life-drops that pass The break in the heart Thru the soul’s hour-glass. The songs of the singer  Are tones that repeat  The cry of the heart– ‘Till it ceases to beat.
__label__notpolitical I build my nest not on the crest Of the mountain-throne, but in the breast– The sheltering arm of the forest warm, Where my dovelets swing ‘mid the maddest storm; Here I see and sigh! ‘neath the grieving sky,  Lo, a race is hung on the trees! A-wing I go, and the land below  Is riot-red with a cruel woe; For the hand of Hate, at a furious rate, Is sowing the seeds of a terrible fate; And each venomous seed is the prejudice weed That buds and blooms with a murderous deed! Oh, I love the land of Justice grand,  Where men are free, heart, head and hand; Where the smile and nod of the greening sod Are bright and and glad with the gift of God: Where over the plains and the mountainous reigns The flag that frees each soul from chains! “Land of the free,” whose flag I see! What boots thy boast of Liberty?   What avails thy might, while in thy sight A race is robbed of its dearest right? Hark! I hear the yell of the hounds of hell– Thy sons obsessed with the lynching spell! How I long to see thy Liberty With e’en thy lowliest subject free; With none denied or crushed in pride, But souls ascending side by side; Thy streaming Stars and bleeding Bars Thus mean a victory more than war’s! “Let freedom ring”- ‘tis a well to sing,  But let it from the mountains bring– Not only to the fortunate few– Its peace to all ‘neath the “Red, White and Blue!” Ah! I see and sigh, ‘neath the heavens high, While a race is hung on the trees to die! 
__label__notpolitical She held him in her bronzen arms    And fed him from her lavish breast, And rid him of a child's alarms,    With songs that gave him rest.  He loved her tenderly, he said,    And vowed to fill her life with pleasure. He's growing old and she is dead,    A picture in his memory's treasure.  But once he paused upon the bench    Ere yet he spake the final sentence Upon a slender black-faced wench,    Whose eyes were grime with unrepentance:  "Old Mammy's child! Tut! Tut! 'Tis bad    For one so young to mock the law. Your mother's eyes must deepen sad,    She looked upon these things with awe."  
__label__notpolitical And she shall be the friend of youth for aye; Of quick'ning youth whose eyes have seen the gleam; Of youth between whose tears and laughter stream Bright bows of hope; of youth, audacious, gay Who dares to know himself a Caesar, say, A Shakespeare or a Galahad. The dream To him is real: and things are as they seem, For Beauty veils from him the feet of clay.  How holy and how wonderful her trust-- Youth's friend--and yes, how blest. For down the west Each day shall go to the sun, and time in time Shall die, the unborn shall again be dust; But she with youth eternal on her breast, Immortal, too, shall sit serene, sublime.  
__label__notpolitical I hear you singing happily, My boy of tarnished mien, Lifting your limpid, trustful gaze In innocence serene. A thousand javelins of pain Assault my heaving breast When I behold the storm of years That beat without your nest. O sing, my lark, your matin song Of joyous rhapsody, Distil the sweetness of the hours In gladsome ecstasy. For time awaits your buoyant flight Across the bar of years. Sing, sing your song, my bonny lark, Before it melts in tears!
__label__notpolitical The mother soothes her mantled child With incantation sad and wild; A deep compassion brims her eye And stills upon her lips, the sigh.  Her thoughts are leaping down the years, O’er branding bars, through seething tears, Her heart is sandaling his feet Adown the world’s corroding street.  Then, with a start she dons a smile His tender yearnings to beguile. And only God will ever know The wordless measure of her woe. 
__label__notpolitical That dusky child upon your knee Is breath of God’s eternity; Direct his vision to the height — Let naught obscure his royal right.  Although the highways to renown Are iron-barred by fortune’s frown, ‘Tis his to forge the master-key That wields the locks of destiny! 
__label__notpolitical I Am Black. Pouskin or Dumas or Toussaint L’Overture. I am Black. I have been the path of the Centuries And Pharoes and Napoleons have  Trod me up to glory. I am Black. Ham or Othello or Crispus Attucks–  I have been fuel for the  Flame of Progress.  I have reared the everlasting Pyramids And have flung Nineveh and Babylon Up to God.  I am Black.  I have dredged the Nile That Civilization might bring  Darkness unto me. I have cut marble and granite For Rome and Carthage.  I have lifted the rocks from Culebra and Pedro Miguel  And have watched the Seas meet. I am Black. I have been the great Burden-bearer, The rungs in the ladder of mine  Enemy. Mine Enemy has bound mine eyes. I have borne him to the mountain-top And he has gloried in the Sunlight  That I could not see.  But now I shall cast off the bandage From mine eyes  And I will see the glory  That I have made.  I am Black.
__label__notpolitical God set his soul to music, chord on chord, As sweet as Heaven's hosannas to the Lord: A lute of love moved by the Spirit Breath High as Eternal life and deep as Death!
__label__notpolitical God gave us the gift of song, And bade us fill the world with tears Of Happiness; when days were long, To make a melody of fears.  God gave us the power to feel The joy of passions exquisite, Courage to suffer, and the zeal Of yearning for the infinite.   God gave us the strength to die, To follow through the dark agrope, A stretch of dreary, rimless sky-- God gave us the boon of hope.  
__label__notpolitical We would not call you, Dunbar, from your rest, For you were weary when you sotfly sang The lullaby that soothed your love-sweet breast, And o'er the raptured world divinely rang, Amid the storms of Life's tumultuous clan, Of battle-thunders in the fateful Night That hide the smiles of Heaven from our sight;-- Lo, while you sleep the sleep of paradise We seek the blessed morning and its light 'Ere sleep comes down to soothe the weary eyes!'  ENVOY  Ah, Poet Paul! you ang and all is right! We feel our soulds expanding for the flight-- Lord, help us breathe to Thee a prayer and rise And touch Thy Truth Eternal on the Height. 'Ere sleep comes down to soothe the weary eyes!' 
__label__notpolitical She cradles him, her babe, upon her breast, Great with this joy of all the earth most dear. A lullaby, touched with a trembling tear. She croons to Heaven; it is a prayer exprest that he, her boy, may triumph in life's test. He sleeps in dreamless peace, his listless ear Close to her gentle heart of love sincere-- The strength that is her soul's immortal best.  Madonna! many a son you offer up On Truth's eternal Cross of Calvary; And you have drunk of each's death brimming cup. Down in the vale of God's Gethsemane. Dear Lord! this woman and her children sup The gall of death--for Boundless Liberty.  
__label__notpolitical Shall I say, “My son, you’re branded in this country’s pageantry, By strange subtleties you’re tethered, and no forum sets you free?” Shall I mark the young lights fading through your soul-enchannelled eye, As the dusky pall of shadows screen the highway of your sky?  Or shall I, with love prophetic, bid you dauntlessly arise. Spurn the handicap that clogs you, taking what the world denies, Bid you storm the sullen fortress wrought by prejudice and wrong With a faith that shall not falter, in your heart and on your tongue! 
__label__notpolitical I Lit with cheap colored lights a basement den, With rows of chairs and tables on each side, And, all about, young, dark-skinned women and men Drinking and smoking, merry, vacant-eyed. A Negro band, that scarcely seems awake, Drones out half-heartedly a lazy tune, While quick and willing boys their orders take And hurry to and from the near saloon. Then suddenly a happy, lilting note Is struck, the walk and hop and trot begin, Under the smoke upon foul air afloat; Around the room the laughing puppets spin To sound of fiddle, drum and clarinet, Dancing, their world of shadows to forget. II ’Tis best to sit and gaze; my heart then dances To the lithe bodies gliding slowly by, The amorous and inimitable glances That subtly pass from roguish eye to eye, The laughter gay like sounding silver ringing, That fills the whole wide room from floor to ceiling,— A rush of rapture to my tried soul bringing— The deathless spirit of a race revealing. Not one false step, no note that rings not true! Unconscious even of the higher worth Of their great art, they serpent-wise glide through The syncopated waltz. Dead to the earth And her unkindly ways of toil and strife, For them the dance is the true joy of life. III And yet they are the outcasts of the earth, A race oppressed and scorned by ruling man; How can they thus consent to joy and mirth Who live beneath a world-eternal ban? No faith is theirs, no shining ray of hope, Except the martyr’s faith, the hope that death Some day will free them from their narrow scope And once more merge them with the infinite breath. But, oh! they dance with poetry in their eyes Whose dreamy loveliness no sorrow dims, And parted lips and eager, gleeful cries, And perfect rhythm in their nimble limbs. The gifts divine are theirs, music and laughter; All other things, however great, come after.
__label__notpolitical Ah, how poets sing and die! Make one song and Heaven takes it; Have one heart and Beauty breaks it; Chatterton, Shelley, Keats and I-- Ah, how poets sing and die! 
__label__notpolitical What is so sad as when a poet dies Whose song was sweet and bold, whose face was black, Who audience ahd not evolved, alack! to cherish all he brought them from the skies? The swin has had a pearl. How few the eyes That followed him when on that horse's back he reared up throug the air that has no track, To where non but Apollo's darlings rise. He sang and "loved and lost," but nevermore Will such sad themes be his; for at the gate Of sweet Elysium he'll learn a song With raptures deeper than was his before High love of song admits one in that state Forever!--think, forever's very long. 
__label__notpolitical Aunt Sue has a head full of stories. Aunt Sue has a whole heart full of stories. Summer nights on the front porch Aunt Sue cuddles a brown-faced child to her bosom And tells him stories.  Black slaves Working in the hot sun, And black slaves Walking in the dewy night, And black slaves Singing sorrow songs on the banks of a mighty river Mingle themselves softly In the flow of old Aunt Sue's voice, Mingle themselves softly In the dark shadows that cross and recross Aunt Sue's stories.  And the dark-faced child, listening, Knows that Aunt Sue's stories are real stories. He knows that Aunt Sue Never got her stories out of any book at all, But that they came Right out of her own life.  And the dark-faced child is quiet Of a summer night Listening to Aunt Sue's stories. 
__label__notpolitical Dark-skinned Mothers of America, Who sit today, perhaps, with bowed down head, Because your home is lonely since he left-- Leave all to God, and rise and smile instead; Stretch forthh tthe arms that nursed him as a child And guided his dear feet in ways of truth, Remembering how your love has glorified  And brightened all his earnest, hopeful youth. Stretch forth your ams to Heaven, and say to Him: 'God, I have given my best, my all, to fight In Freedom's holy name-- to live or die. Which seemeth best, for justice and for right! Grant thou, O God, that through this sacrifice, When blood has well atoned for ancient wrong, That Ethiopia's Sons may raise their heads And sing a louder, clearer, grander song.'  Let it be so, when this dread war shall cease, When hushed is every bitter cry of woe, That all your children who to earth are spared, In bonds of fellowship may firmer grow. For none were better, stronger, nor more brave, Than those of ours who sleep with ice-cold brow. Let other nations rise and plead our cause. And let them understand, who scorn us now!  
__label__notpolitical Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake your brown feet, chile, Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake 'em swift and wil'    Get way back, honey,    Do that low-down step.    Walk on over, darling,       Now! Come out       With your left. Shake your brown feet, honey, Shake 'em, honey chile.  Sun's going down this evening-- Might never rise no mo'. The sun's going down this very night Might never rise no mo'-- So dance with swift feet, honey,    (The banjo's sobbing low) Dance with swift feet, honey--    Might never dance no mo'.  Shake your brown feet, Liza, Shake 'em, Liza, chile, Shake your brown feet, Liza,    (The music's soft and wil') Shake your brown feet, Liza,    (The banjo's sobbing low) The sun's going down this very night Might never rise no mo'. 
__label__notpolitical Don't knock on my door, little child,    I cannot let you in; You know not what a world this is    Of cruelty and sin. Wait in the still eternity    Until I come to you. The world is cruel, cruel, child,    I cannot let you through.  Don't knock at my heart, little one,    I cannot bear the pain    Of turning deaf ears to your call, Time and time again.    You do not know the monster men Inhabiting the earth,    Be still, be still, my precious child,    I cannot give you birth. 
__label__notpolitical Oh, silver tree! Oh, shining rivers of the soul!  In a Harlem cabaret Six long-headed jazzers play. A dancing girl whose eyes are bold Lifts nigh a dress of silken gold.  Oh, singing tree! Oh, shining rivers of the soul!  Were Eve's eyes In the first garden Just a bit too bold? Was Cleopatra gorgeous In a gown of gold?  Oh, shining tree! Oh, silver rivers of the soul!  In a whirling cabaret Six long-headed jazzers play. 
__label__notpolitical Does a jazz-band ever sob? They say a jazz-band's gay. Yet as the vulgar dancers whirled And the wan night wore away, One said she heard the jazz-band sob When the little dawn was grey. 
__label__notpolitical One who sings "chansons vulgaires" In a Harlem cellar Where the jazz-band plays From dark to dawn Would not understand Should you tell her That she is like a nymph For some wild faun. 
__label__notpolitical Sleep, little son! Rest, ebon head!    Sad, your mother mourns your soldier-father dead, Who on the soil of France bravely fought and bled;--    Sleep! Sleep! When grim and grewsome War took its terrific toll    And grey Grief filled the heart with sorrowing of soul, He answered then the call fo the world for Freedom's right.    Sleep, little son! Good-night. Shade of my dead! Oh warrior one!    Watch from you realm upon our little son. Teach him that you died that all might rise and run;    Watch! Watch! Make for him a place in the world's new March of Man; And be, oh spirit fine, his leader in the van. Ah grant, dear husband mine, your sad wife's fond request;    Rest warrior one! Then rest! Sleep, little son! Sleep, little son! I pray your Living Lord that victory is won; That all the daring deed by our dear soldier done--    Deeds done-- Up to the throne of God will rise in surging Throngs Holding high hands to Heav'n to right a Race's wrongs,-- Mind not, my darling son, your mother's eyes that weep:    Sleep, little son! Now sleep! 
__label__notpolitical My loftier songs may never see the light, Though fine as what some pompous bard can make. Here's one inspired by the stomachache Incurred by eating peanuts yesternight. But luck can't hide the sparks, for sparks are bright And should, because of darkness, win the cake, (As Dunbar showed you in his glittering wake) So fame again might treat song's victim white. No Muses can rebel stomach rule; She'll force them to the bread and cabbage class; Thin walls divide the martyr and the fool, And death is less inviting than the crass ; I'm dragged into maudlin cabbage school Because none had the heart to sound the brass.
__label__notpolitical On Pegasus you've flown into a sheen — A glorious passion has possessed your tongue. You moved old doctors with your lispings, strung Harplike, awaking melodies serene. Though in this moon when conscious song seems lean,- And bends to prose, your steed with wings outflung, Veils the Plebeian quills ;—wreath-hemmed while young As Byron was, or Dunbar, at nineteen. Your diapasons fill Apollo's skies; Yet, when his restless Nine encircle you, For pennyroyal sinks your hooked line, You tonic us mid pleasure and surprise . . . So I one of your patients credit you For songs like meat, like medicine, like wine.
__label__notpolitical Stronger than man-made bars, the chain, that round your life's arean, Deeper than hell the anchor sweeps That stills your young desires; Darker than night the inward look That meditation offers, Redder than blood the future years Roll down the hills of torture! But ah! you were not made for this, And life is but preluding-- The major theme shall hold its sway When full awake, not dreaming, Your ebon foot shall press the sod Where immortelles are blooming; Beyond the glaze of fevered years I see--THE DAY IS COMING! 
__label__notpolitical This much the gods vouchsafe today:    That we two lie in the clover, Watching the heavens dip and sway,    With galleons sailing over. This much is granted for an hour:    That we are young and tender, That I am bee and you are flower,    Honey-mouthed and swaying slender. This sweet of sweets is ours now:    To wander through the land, Plucking an apple from its bough    To toss from hand to hand. No thing is certain, joy nor sorrow,    Except the hour we know it; Oh, wear my heart today; tomorrow    Who knows where the winds will blow it?
__label__notpolitical Now let all lovely things embark Upon the sea of mist With her whose luscious mouth the dark, Grim troubadour has kissed.  The silver clock that ticked away Her days, and never knew Its beats were sword thrusts to the clay That too much beauty slew.  The pillow favored with her tears And hallowed by her head; I shall not even keep my fears, Now their concern is dead.  But where shall I bury sun and rain, How mortalise the stars, How still the half-heard cries of pain That seared her soul with scars?  In what sea depths shall all the seeds Of every flower die? Where shall I scatter the broken reeds, And how erase the sky?  And where shall I find a hole so deep No troubled ghost may rise? There will I put my heart to sleep Wanting her face and eyes. 
__label__notpolitical If love be staunch, call mountains brittle; Love is a thing will live So long, my dear,—oh, just the little While water stays in a sieve.  Yea, love is deathless as the day Whose death the stars reveal; And love is loyal all the way, If treachery be leal.  Beyond the shadow of a doubt, No thing is sweet as love, But, oh, the bitterness spewed out Of the heart at the end thereof!  Beyond all cavil or complaint, Love’s ways are double-dyed; Beneath the surplice of a saint The cloven hooves are spied. Whom yesterday love rhymed his sun Today he names a star; When the course of another day is run, What will he say you are? 
__label__notpolitical My window opens out into the trees And in that small space Of branches and of sky I see the seasons pass Behold the tender green Give way to darker heavier leaves. The glory of the autumn comes When steeped in mellow sunlight The fragile, golden leaves Against a clear blue sky Linger in the magic of the afternoon And then reluctantly break off And filter down to pave A street with gold. Then bare, gray branches Lift themselves against the Cold December sky Sometimes weaving a web Across the rose and dusk of late sunset Sometimes against a frail new moon And one bright star riding A sky of that dark, living blue Which comes before the heaviness Of night descends, or the stars Have powdered the heavens. Winds beat against these trees; The cold, but gentle rain of spring Touches them lightly The summer torrents strive To lash them into a fury And seek to break them- But they stand. My life is fevered And a restlessness at times An agony—again a vague And baffling discontent Possesses me. I am thankful for my bit of sky And trees, and for the shifting Pageant of the seasons. Such beauty lays upon the heart A quiet. Such eternal change and permanence Take meaning from all turmoil And leave serenity Which knows no pain.
__label__notpolitical Second prize poem in the Amy Spingarn Contest. Dr. Horne was born in New York City in 1899. He was educated at the College of the City of New York, the University of Chicago and the Northern Illinois College of Opthalmology. He is a practising optometrist in New York City.  * * * To All of You  My little stone Sinks quickly Into the bosom of this deep, dark pool Of oblivion... I have troubled its breast but little. Yet those far shores That knew me not Will feel the fleeting, furtive kiss Of my tiny concentric ripples....   To Lewellyn  You have borne full well The burden of my friendship— I have drunk deep At your crystal pool, And in return I have-polluted its waters With the bile of my hatred, I have flooded your soul With tortuous thoughts, I have played Iscariot To your Pythias...   To Mother   I came In the blinding sweep Of ecstatic pain, I go In the throbbing pulse Of Aching Space, In the eons between I piled upon you Pain on pain Ache on ache And yet as I go I shall know That you will grieve And want me back.....   To Bennetti   You have freed me— In opening wide the doors Of fiesh— You have freed me Of the binding leash. I have climbed the heights Of white disaster. My body screaming In the silver crash of passion..... Before you gave yourself To him I had chained myself For you. But when at last You lowered your proud flag In surrender complete You gave me too, as hostage— And I have swept my joy At the dawn-tipped shrine Of many breasts.   To Jean  When you poured your love Like molten flame Into the throbbing mold Of her pulsing veins Leaving her blood a river of fire And her arteries channels of light, I hated you...  Hated with that primal hate That has its wells In the flesh of me And the flesh of you And the flesh of her I hated you— Hated with envy Your mastery of her being. . With one fleshy gesture You pricked the irridescent bubble Of my dreams And so to make Your conquest more sweet I tell you now That I hated you...  To Catalina  Love thy piano,Oh girl, It will give you back Note for Note The harmonies of your soul. It will sing back to you The high songs of your heart. It will give As well as take.  To Mariette  I sought ccnsolation In the sorrow of your eyes. You sought reguerdon In the crying of my heart. . We found that shattered dreamers Can be bitter hosts....   To ————   You call it Death of the Spirit And I call it Life... The vigor of vibration, The muffled knocks, The silver sheen of passion’s flood, The ecstacy of pain.. You call it Death of the Spirit And I call it Life.  To Telie  You have made my voice A rippling laugh But my heart A crying thing . ’Tis better thus, A fleeting kiss And then, The dark  To “Chick”  Oh Achilles of the moleskins And the gridiron Do not wonder Nor doubt that this is I That lie so calmly here— This is the same exultant beast That so joyously Ran the ball with you In those far flung days of abandon. You remember how récklessly We revelled in the heat and the dust And the swirl of conflict? You remember they called us The Terrible Two? And you remember After we had battered our heads And our bodies Against the stonewall of their defense,— You remember the signal I would call And how you would look at me In faith and admiration And say “Let’s go”... How the lines would clash And strain, And how I would find an opening, A wee small space, Amidst tangling arms and torsos, And how I would slip through Fighting and squirming Over the line To victory. You remember, Chick? When you gaze at me here Let that same light Of faith and admiration Shine in your eyes For I have battered the stark stonewall Before me.  I have kept faith with you And now I have called my signal, Found my opening And slipped through Fighting and squirming Over the line To victory.  To Wanda  To you, so far away So cold and aloof, - To you, who knew me so well, This is my last Grand Gesture This my last Great Effect And as I go winging Through the black doors of eternity Is that thin sound I hear Your applause? .....  
__label__notpolitical The sounds Of the Harlem night Drop one by one into stillness. The last player -piano is closed. The last victrola ceases with the "Jazz Boy Blues.” The last crying baby sleeps And the night becomes Still as a whispering heartbeat. I toss Without rest in the darkness, Weary as the tired night, My soul Empty as the silence, Empty with a vague, Aching emptiness, Desiring, Needing someone, Something.  I toss without rest In the darkness Until the new dawn, Wan and pale, Descends like a white mist Into the court-yard. 
__label__notpolitical "Me an' ma baby's Got two mo' ways, Two mo' ways to do de buck!    Da, da,    Da, da, da! Two mo' ways to do de buck!"  Soft light on the tables, Music gay, Brown-skin steppers In a cabaret.  White folks, laugh! White folks, pray!  “Me an' ma baby's Got two mo' ways, Two mo' ways to do de buck!" 
__label__notpolitical Droning a drowsy syncopated tune, Rocking back and forth to a mellow croon,    I heard a Negro play. Down on Lenox Avenue the other night By the pale dull pallor of an old gas light    He did a lazy sway. . . .     He did a lazy sway. . . .  To the tune o' those Weary Blues. With his ebony hands on each ivory key He made that poor piano moan with melody.    O Blues! Swaying to and fro on his rickety stool He played that sad raggy tune like a musical fool.    Sweet Blues! Coming from a black man's soul.    O Blues! In a deep song voice with a melancholy tone I heard that Negro sing, that old piano moan    "Ain't got nobody in all this world,    Ain't got nobody but ma self.    I's gwine to quit ma frownin'    And put ma troubles on the shelf.” Thump, thump, thump, went his foot on the floor. He played a few chords then he sang some more    "I got the Weary Blues    And I can't be satisfied.    Got the Weary Blues    And can't be satisfied    I ain't happy no mo'    And I wish that I had died.”       And far into the night he crooned that tune.       The stars went out and so did the moon.       The singer stopped playing and went to bed       While the Weary Blues echoed through his head.       He slept like a rock or a man that's dead.
__label__notpolitical Oh, wash-woman, Arms elbow-deep in white suds, Soul washed clean, Clothes washed clean,— I have many songs to sing you Could I but find the words. Was it four o'clock or six o'clock on a winter afternoon, I saw you wringing out the last shirt in Miss White Lady's kitchen? Was it four o'clock or six o'clock? I don't remember. But I know, at seven one spring morning you were on Vermont Street with a bundle in your arms going to wash clothes. And I know I've seen you in a New York subway train in the late afternoon coming home from washing clothes. Yes, I know you, wash-woman. I know how you send your children to school, and high-school, and even college. I know how you work and help your man when times are hard. I know how you build your house up from the wash-tub and call it home. And how you raise your churches from white suds for the service of the Holy God. And I've seen you singing, wash-woman. Out in the backyard garden under the apple trees, singing, hanging white clothes on long lines in the sun-shine. And I've seen you in church a Sunday morning singing, praising your Jesus, because some day you're going to sit on the right hand of the Son of God and forget you ever were a wash-woman. And the aching back and the bundles of clothes will be unremembered then. Yes, I've seen you singing. And for you,    O singing wash-woman,    For you, singing little brown woman,    Singing strong black woman,    Singing tall yellow woman,    Arms deep in white suds,    Soul clean,    Clothes clean,—    For you I have many songs to make    Could I but find the words.
__label__notpolitical Because my mouth  Is wide with laughter And my throat Is deep with song, You do not think  I suffer after  I have held my pain  So long.   Because my mouth  Is wide with laughter,  You do not hear My inner cry,  Because my feet  Are gay with dancing,  You do not know  I die.  
__label__notpolitical Little dark baby, Little Jew baby, Little outcast, America is seeking the stars, America is seeking tomorrow. You are America. I am America America—the dream, America—the vision. America—the star-seeking I. Out of yesterday The chains of slavery; Out of yesterday, The ghettos of Europe; Out of yesterday, The poverty and pain of the old, old world, The building and struggle of this new one, We come You and I, Seeking the stars. You and I, You of the blue eyes And the blond hair, I of the dark eyes And the crinkly hair. You and I Offering hands Being brothers, Being one, Being America. You and I. And I? Who am I? You know me: I am Crispus Attucks at the Boston Tea Party; Jimmy Jones in the ranks of the last black troops marching for democracy. I am Sojourner Truth preaching and praying for the goodness of this wide, wide land; Today's black mother bearing tomorrow's America. Who am I? You know me, Dream of my dreams, I am America. I am America seeking the stars. America— Hoping, praying Fighting, dreaming. Knowing There are stains On the beauty of my democracy, I want to be clean. I want to grovel No longer in the mire. I want to reach always After stars. Who am I? I am the ghetto child, I am the dark baby, I am you And the blond tomorrow And yet I am my one sole self, America seeking the stars.
__label__notpolitical Slim Sentinels Stretching lacy arms  About a slumbrous moon; Black quivering Silhouettes Tremulous, Stencilled on the petal Of a bluebell; Ink spluttered On a robin's breast' The jagged rent Of mountains  Reflected in a  Stilly sleeping lake; Fragile pinnacles Of fairy castles; Torn webs of shadows; And  Printed 'gainst the sky-- The trembling beauty Of an urgent pine. 
__label__notpolitical It is Saturday night. The place is crowded And such a crowd! It is neither black nor white, Brown nor yellow There are all colors, There are all manners of peopleI Here and there, you may catch Blue-tinted by the smoke A glimpse of an oriental face The lights of the place are as manv-hued As the faces of the people Wine and Whiskey are poured like oil Into the fire of Youth, Causing leaping, ambitious flames Giving added brightness to maiden eves Which seem to say, "There is fire within, Beware!" - Old men and women are here, too Their glimmering coals are fanned to heat anew Soul endangering, Which consume their dry old carcasses. There comes a whirl of noise Like the breaking of a storm. There is a hint of harmony-- A bit of melody. Five men, black, brown and yellow Contortionists of notes, instruments And bodies, make music. At once, there is wild motion! Motion that defies description Each couple improvising movements. Those most inflamed by wine, music Or close embraces, Surpass their fellows. My eyes follow couple after couple. There is a brown girl, a wild thing, Graceful as rippling silk, With eyes that laugh over the shoulders of a Bold boy Whose ancestors might have been Vikings, So big and strong is he. They whirl on and I lose them in the crowd, Only to be attracted by a Chinese lad Dancing gaily with a maiden of the Occident. He holds her closely-- His face expressionless. The girl is smiling No, she is Iaughing! He whispers something with a swift side-wise glance. She tosses back her pretty head And laughs and laughs and laughs! A little brown haired girl With a Lothario long withered Who would cheat Time with such a play-mate Flirts boldly with a brown youngster. Who has the look of neither toiling Nor spinning, He is good-looking, I think Yet, too smooth-looking, too finished in His knife-creased clothes. He hints of marked cards--bounty paving women-- Yet-Satyrs grown gross pouched and bald Are damn poor jazzing mates! A bell clangs! One o'clock! I join the struggle for the door And reach the open air And a pert cabman!
__label__notpolitical I shall hate you  Like a dart of singing steel Shot through still air At even-tide. Or solemnly As pines are sobre When they stand etched Against the sky. Hating you shall be a game Played with cool hands And slim fingers. Your heart will yearn For the lonely splendour Of the pine tree; While rekindled fires  In my eyes Shall wound you like swift arrows. Memory will lay its hands Upon your breast And you will understand My hatred. 
__label__notpolitical Cemeteries are places for departed souls And bones interred, Or hearts with shattered loves. A woman with lips made warm for laughter Would find grey stones and roving spirits Too chill for living, moving pulses . . . And thou, great spirit, wouldst shiver in thy granite shroud Should idle mirth or empty talk Disturb thy tranquil sleeping. A cemetery is a place for shattered loves And broken hearts . . . Bowed before the crystal chalice of thy soul, I find the multi-colored fragrance of thy mind Has lost itself in Death's transparency. Oh, stir the lucid waters of thy sleep And coin for me a tale Of happy loves and gems and joyous limbs And hearts where love is sweet! A cemetery is a place for broken hearts And silent thought . . . And silence never moves, nor speaks, Nor sings.
__label__notpolitical Golgotha is a mountain, a purple mound Almost out of sight. One night they hanged two thieves there, And another man. Some women wept heavily that night; Their tears are flowing still. They have made a river; Once it covered me. Then the people went away and left Golgotha Deserted. Oh, I've seen many mountains: Pale purple mountains melting in the evening mists and blurring on the borders of the sky. I climbed old Shasta and chilled my hands in its summer snows. I rested in the shadow of Popocatepetl and it whispered to me of daring prowess. I looked upon the Pyrenees and felt the zest of warm exotic nights. I slept at the foot of Fujiyama and dreamed of legend and of death. And I've seen other mountains rising from the wistful moors like the breasts of a slender maiden. Who knows the mystery of mountains! Some of them are awful, others are just lonely. ... Italy has its Rome and California has San Francisco, All covered with mountains. Some think these mountains grew Like ant hills Or sand dunes. That might be so — I wonder what started them all! Babylon is a mountain And so is Nineveh, With grass growing on them; Palaces and hanging gardens started them. I wonder what is under the hills In Mexico And Japan! There are mountains in Africa too. Treasure is buried there: Gold and precious stones And moulded glory. Lush grass is growing there Sinking before the wind. Black men are bowing. Naked in that grass Digging with their fingers. I am one of them: Those mountains should be ours. It would be great To touch the pieces of glory with our hands. These mute unhappy hills, Bowed down with broken backs, Speak often one to another: " A day is as a year, " they cry, " And a thousand years as one day. " We watched the caravan That bore our queen to the courts of Solomon; And when the first slave traders came We bowed our heads. "Oh, Brothers, it is not long! Dust shall yet devour the stones But we shall be here when they are gone. " Mountains are rising all around me. Some are so small they are not seen; Others are large. All of them get big in time and people forget What started them at first. Oh the world is covered with mountains! Beneath each one there is something buried: Some pile of wreckage that started it there. Mountains are lonely and some are awful. ... One day I will crumble. They'll cover my heap with dirt and that will make a mountain. I think it will be Golgotha.
__label__notpolitical This poem won the first prize of $75 in The Crisis prize contest of 1926.  I thought I saw an angel flying low, I thought I saw the flicker of a wing Above the mulberry trees; but not again. Bethesda sleeps. This ancient pool that healed A host of bearded Jews does not awake.  This pool that once the angels troubled does not move No angel stirs it now, no Saviour comes With healing in His hands to raise the sick And bid the lame man leap upon the ground.  The golden days are gone. Why do we wait So long upon the marble steps, blood Falling from our open wounds? and why Do our black faces search the empty sky? Is there something we have forgotten? some precious thing We have lost, wandering in strange lands?  There was a day, I remember now, I beat my breast and cried, “Wash me God, Wash me with a wave of wind upon The barley; O quiet One, draw near, draw near! Walk upon the hills with lovely feet And in the waterfall stand and speak.  “Dip white hands in the lily pool and mourn Upon the harps still hanging in the trees Near Babylon along the river's edge, But oh, remember me, I pray, before The summer goes and rose leaves lose their red.”  The old terror takes my heart, the fear Of quiet waters and of faint twilights. There will be better days when I am gone And healing pools where I cannot be healed. Fragrant stars will gleam forever and ever Above the place where I lie desolate.  Yet I hope, still I long to live. And if there can be returning after death I shall come back. But it will not be here; If you want me you must search for me Beneath the palms of Africa. Or if I am not there then you may call to me Across the shining dunes, perhaps I shall Be following a desert caravan.  I may pass through centuries of death With quiet eyes, but I'll remember still A jungle tree with burning scarlet birds. There is something I have forgotten, some precious thing. I shall be seeking ornaments of ivory, I shall be dying for a jungle fruit. You do not hear, Bethesda. O still green water in a stagnant pool! Love abandoned you and me alike. There was a day you held a rich full moon Upon your heart and listened to the words Of men now dead and saw the angels fly. There is a simple story on your face; Years have wrinkled you. I know, Bethesda! You are sad. It is the same with me. 
__label__notpolitical There was a man —Whose name was Pete, And he was a buck —From his head to his feet. He loved a dollar, —But hated a dime; And so was poor —Nine-tenths of the time. The Judge said “Pete, —What of your wife?” And Pete replied —“She lost her life.” “Pete,” said the Judge, —“Was it lost in a row? Tell me quick, —And tell me how.” Pete straightened up —With a hic and a sigh, Then looked the Judge —Full in the eye. “O, Judge, my wife —Would never go To a Sunday dance —Or a movie show. “But I went, Judge, —Both day and night, And came home broke —And also tight. “The moon was up, —My purse was down, And I was the bully —Of the bootleg town. “I was crooning a lilt —To corn and rye For the loop in my legs —And the fight in my eye. “I met my wife; —She was wearing a frown, And catechising —Her Sunday gown. “ ‘O Pete, O Pete’ —She cried aloud, ‘The Devil is falling —Right out of a cloud.’ “I looked straight up —And fell flat down And a Ford machine —Pinned my head to the ground. “The Ford moved on, —And my wife was in it; And I was sober, —That very minute. “For my head was bleeding, —My heart was a-flutter; And the moonshine within me —Was tipping the gutter. “The Ford, it faster —And faster sped Till it dipped and swerved —And my wife was dead. “Two bruised men lay —In a hospital ward— One seeking vengeance, —The other the Lord. “He said to me: —‘Your wife was drunk, You are crazy, —And my Ford is junk.’ “I raised my knife —And drove it in At the top of his head —And the point of his chin. “O Judge, O Judge, —If the State has a chair, Please bind me in it —And roast me there.” There was a man —Whose name was Pete, And he welcomed death —From his head to his feet.
__label__notpolitical They in their cruel traps, and we in ours,    Survey each other’s rage, and pass the hours    Commiserating each the other’s woe,    To mitigate his own pain’s fiery glow.    Man could but little proffer in exchange    Save that his cages have a larger range.    That lion with his lordly, untamed heart    Has in some man his human counterpart, Some lofty soul in dreams and visions wrapped,    But in the stifling flesh securely trapped.    Gaunt eagle whose raw pinions stain the bars    That prison you, so men cry for the stars! Some delve down like the mole far underground,    (Their nature is to burrow, not to bound), Some, like the snake, with changeless slothful eye,    Stir not, but sleep and smoulder where they lie.     Who is most wretched, these caged ones, or we,    Caught in a vastness beyond our sight to see?
__label__notpolitical If for a day joy masters me,    Think not my wounds are healed; Far deeper than the scars you see    I keep their roots concealed. They shall bear blossoms with the fall;    I have their word for this  Who tend my roots with rains of gall,    And suns of prejudice.
__label__notpolitical She does not know Her beauty She thinks her brown body Has no glory If she could dance Naked Under palm trees And see her image in the river She would know But there are no palm trees On the street And dish water gives back no images
__label__notpolitical I buried you deeper last night, You with your tears And your tangled hair You with your lips That kissed so fair I buried you deeper last night, I buried you deeper last night, With fuller breasts And stronger arms With softer lips And newer charms I buried you deeper last night. Deeper .... aye, deeper And again tonight 'Till that gay spirit That once was you Will tear its soul In climbing through Deeper .... aye, deeper I buried you deeper last night.
__label__notpolitical Strut and wiggle, Shameless gal. Wouldn't no good fellow Be your pal. Hear dat music. . . . Jungle night. Hear dat music. . . . And the moon was white. Sing your Blues song, Pretty baby. You want lovin' And you don't mean maybe. Jungle lover. . . . Night black boy. . . .  Two against the moon And the moon was joy. Strut and wiggle, Shameless Nan. Wouldn't no good fellow Be your man?
__label__notpolitical (For a Black Mother)  My little dark baby, My little earth-thing, My little love-one, What shall I sing For your lullaby?    Stars,    Stars,    A necklace of stars    Winding the night.  My little black baby, My dark body's baby, What shall I sing For your lullaby?    Moon,    Moon,    Great diamond moon,    Kissing the night.  Oh, little dark baby, Night black baby,    Stars, stars,    Moon,    Night stars,    Moon,    For your sleep-song lullaby! 
__label__notpolitical To climb a hill that hungers for the sky, To dig my hands wrist deep in pregnant earth, To watch a young bird, veering, learn to fly, To give a still, stark poem shining birth. To hear the rain drool, dimpling, down the drain And splash with a wet giggle in the street, To ramble in the twilight after supper, And to count the pretty faces that you meet. To ride to town on trolleys, crowded, teeming With joy and hurry and laughter and push and sweat — Squeezed next a patent-leathered Negro dreaming Of a wrinkled river and a minnow net. To buy a paper from a breathless boy, And read of kings and queens in foreign lands, Hyperbole of romance and adventure, All for a penny the color of my hand. To lean against a strong tree's bosom, sentient And hushed before the silent prayer it breathes, To melt the still snow with my seething body And kiss the warm earth tremulous underneath. Ah, life, to let your stabbing beauty pierce me And wound me like we did the studded Christ, To grapple with you, loving you too fiercely, And to die bleeding — consummate with Life.
__label__notpolitical Ah, little road all whirry in the breeze, A leaping clay hill lost among the trees, The bleeding note of rapture streaming thrush Caught in a drowsy hush And stretched out in a single singing line of dusky song. Ah little road, brown as my race is brown, Your trodden beauty like our trodden pride, Dust of the dust, they must not bruise you down. Rise to one brimming golden, spilling cry!
__label__notpolitical I do not ask for love,--ah! no,    Nor friendship's happiness, These were relinquished long ago    I search for something less. I seek a little, tranquil bark    In which to drift at ease Awhile, and then quite silently    To sink in quiet seas. 
__label__notpolitical The quavering zigzag of the fiddle’s notes; The thumping “tum-tum” of the banjo and guitar; The gauzy quiver, flutter of the fiddle; The measured muffled thud of that guitar! And then a voice breaks forth— Loose, careless, mellow— A wealth of voice that rolls, soars, Rolls and falls, A reveling, rich voice, Deeper than the banjo’s; With more of melody than fiddles’ trebles, Yet with that subtle minor trembling through  Which shakes the viol’s slender vibrance As the winds might— And all of this out in a half-hushed autumn dusk! The autumn air itself is tense, suspended, And into this that most spontaneous song! Which ripples on and floats and floats Midst “thum” of banjo And rhythmic background of that constant taut guitar, And travels with the wavers of the fiddle, To float and rise and rest with moon and star!  
__label__notpolitical Not as the white nations     know thee         O Mother! But swarthy of cheek     and full-lipped as the         child races are. Yet thou art she,     the Immaculate Maid,         and none other, Crowned in the stable     at Bethlehem,         hailed of the star. See where they come,     thy people,         so humbly appealing, From the ancient lands     where the olden faiths         had birth. Tired dusky hands     uplifted for thy         healing. Pity them, Mother,     the untaught         of earth.
__label__notpolitical Let the wind-rolled waves tell the tale of the sea, And the talkative pines tell the tale of the tree; Let the motored purr of an automobile Tell the hum-drum tale of power and steel. Let the blithesome chirp tell the tale of the bird, And sad, low sounds tell the tale of the herd; Then enthrone man on the dunce's stool And let his tale be the tale of a fool. 
__label__notpolitical O' de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', H'it's one long strip Hangin' up an' down— Jes' Souf an' Norf; Jes' Norf an' Souf.  Talkin' 'bout sailin' 'round de wurl'— Huh! I'd be so dizzy my head 'ud twurl. If dis heah earf wuz jes' a ball You no the people all 'ud fall.  O' de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', H'it's one long strip Hangin' up an' down— Jes' Souf an' Norf; Jes' Norf an' Souf.  Talkin' 'bout the City whut Saint John saw— Chile you oughta go to Saginaw; A n*****'s chance is “finest kind,” An' pretty gals ain't hard to find.  Huh! de wurl' ain't flat, An' de wurl' ain't roun', Jes' one long strip Hangin' up an' down. Since Norf is up, An' Souf is down, An' Hebben is up, I'm upward boun'.
__label__notpolitical Charleston south Charleston north Charleston back Charleston forth. ........hey! hey! ........hey! hey! Sway, black girl, sway! Charleston left Charleston right Charleston day Charleston night. ........clap! clap! ........clap! clap! Charleston, Charleston on the map! Blues songs sad Biues songs gay Blues songs moan Night away. ........hey! hey! ........hey! hey! Play, jazz band, play! Black gals nice Biack gals mean Biack gals fat Black gals lean. South Street South Street Hey! Hey! Hey! Living in the arms of wide mouth day! 
__label__notpolitical Dusk came dancing down the dale      Like a slim dark maiden, Crowned with blossoms sunset-pale,      Dream-perfumed, dew-laden.  Black as midnight were her eyes,      Crinkly-dark her tresses, Sunbeams, flickering from the skies      Wooed her with caresses.  Lingering but an instant’s space,      All my heart entrancing, Swift and sweet, her warm embrace      Stirred my blood to dancing.  But when Night, in splendor rare,      Set her love-lamps gleaming, Dusk had fled, and left me there      Lone, and lorn, and dreaming. 
__label__notpolitical I    Once more, listening to the wind and rain,  Once more, you and I, and above the hurting sound  Of these comes back the throbbing of remembered rain,  Treasured rain falling on dark ground.  Once more, huddling birds upon the leaves  And summer trembling on a withered vine.  And once more, returning out of pain,  The friendly ghost that was your love and mine.     II    The throb of rain is the throb of muffled drums;  Darkness brings the jungle to our room.  Darkness hangs our room with pendulums  Of vine and in the gathering gloom  Our walls recede into a denseness of  Surrounding trees. This is a night of love  Retained from those lost nights our fathers slept  In huts; this is a night that cannot die.  Let us keep the dance of rain our fathers kept  And tread our dreams beneath the jungle sky.    III   The downpour ceases.  Let us go back, you and I, and dance  Once more upon the glimmering leaves  And as the throbbing of drums increases  Shake the grass and the drippimg boughs of trees.  A ary wind stirs the palm; the old tree grieves.  Lime has charged the years and they have returned.  Then let us dance by metal waters burned  With gold of moon, let us dance  With naked feet beneath the young spice trees.  What was that light, that radiance  On your face?—something I saw when first  You passed beneath the jungle tapestries?  A moment we pause to quench our thirst  Kneeling at the water’s edge, the gleam  Upon your face is plain; you have wanted this,  Oh let us go back and search the tangled dream  And as the muffled-drum-beats throb and miss  Remember again how. early darkness comes   To dreams and silence to the drums.    IV    Let us go back into the dusk again,  Slow and sad-like following the track  Of blown leaves and cool white rain  Into the old grey dreams; let us go back.  Our walls close about us, we lie and listen  To the noise of the street, the storm and the driven birds.  A question shapes your lips, your eyes glisten   Retaining tears, but there are no more words. 
__label__notpolitical He'd play, after the bawdy songs and blues, After the weary plaints Of “Trouble, Trouble deep down in muh soul,” Always one song in which he'd lose the role Of entertainer to the boys. He'd say “My mother’s favorite.” And we knew That what was coming was his chant of saints “When de Saints go ma’chin home And that would end his concert for the day.  Carefully as an old maid over needlework, Oh, as some black deacon, over his Bible, lovingly, He'd tune up specially for this. There'd be No chatter now, no patting of the feet. After a few slow chords, knelling and sweet Oh when de saints go ma’chin home Oh when de sayaints goa ma'chin home He would forget The quieted bunch, his dimming cigarette Stuck into a splintered edge of the guitar. Sorrow deep hidden in his voice, a far And soft light in his strange brown eyes; Alone with his masterchords, his memories. . .    Lawd I wanna be one in nummer    When de saints go ma’chin home. Deep the bass would rumble while the treble, scattered high For all the world like heavy feet a trompin’ toward the sky. With shrillvoiced women getting ‘happy’ All to celestial tunes. The chap’s few speeches helped me understand The reason why he gazed so fixedly Upon the burnished strings. For he would see A gorgeous procession to ‘de Beulah Land’ Of Saints—his friends—‘a climbin’ fo’ deir wings.’ Oh when de saints go ma’chin home Lawd I wanna be one o’ dat nummer When de saints goa ma’chin home...  2.   THERE’D BE—so ran his dream “Old Deacon Zachary With de asthmy in his chest A puffin’ an’ a wheezin’ Up de golden stair Wid de badges of his lodges Strung acrost his heavin’ breast An’ de hoggrease jest shinin’ In his coal black hair An’ ole Sis Joe In huh big straw hat An’ huh wrapper flappin’ Flappin’ in de heavenly win’ An’ huh thinsoled easy walkers Goin’ pitty pitty pat Lawd she'd have to ease her corns When she got in!” Oh when de saints go ma’chin home. “Ole Elder Peter Johnson Wid his corncob jes a puffin’ And de smoke a rollin’ Like stormclouds out behin’ Crossin’ de cloud mountains Widout slowin’ up fo’ nuffin’ Steamin’ up de grade Lak Wes’ bound No. 9: An’ de little brownskinned chillen Wid deir skinny legs a dancin’ Jes’ a kickin’ up ridic’lous To de heavenly band Lookin’ at de Great Drum Major On a white hoss jes’ a prancin’ Wid and gold and silver drumstick A waggin’ in his han’. Oh when de sun refuse to shine Oh when de mo-on goes down In Blood “Old Maumee Annie Wid huh washin’ done An’ huh las’ piece o° laundry In de renchin’ tub, A wavin’ sof’ pink han’s To de much obligin’ sun An’ her feet a moverin’ now To a swif’ rub a dub; And old Grampa Eli Wid his wrinkled old haid A puzzlin’ over summut He ain’ understood Intendin’ to ask Peter Pervidin’ he ain't skyaid ‘Jes what mought be de meanin’ Of de moon in blood? . . . Wen de saints go ma'chin home  3.  WHUFFOLKS, he dreams, will have to stay outside Being so onery.’ But what is he to do With that red brakemen who once let him ride An empty, going home? Or with that kindfaced man Who paid his songs with board and drink and bed? Or with the Yankee Cap'n who left a leg At Vicksburg? ‘Mought be a place, he said Mought be another mansion for’ white saints A smaller one than hisn’ not so gran’ As for the rest oh let them howl and beg. Hell would be good enough, if big enough Widout no shade trees, lawd, widout no rain Whuffolks sho to bring n**** out behin’ Excep’—wen de saints go ma’chin home.  4.  Sportin’ Legs would not be there—nor lucky Sam Nor Smitty, nor Hambone, nor Hardrock Gene An’ not too many guzzlin’, cuttin’ shines Nor bootleggers to keep his pockets clean. An’ Sophie wid de sof’ smile on her face, Her foolin’ voice, her strappin’ body, brown Lak coffee doused wid milk—she had been good To him, wid lovin’, money and wid food.— But saints and heaven didn’t seem to fit Jes rite wid Sophy’s Beauty—nary bit She mought stir trouble, somehow, in dat peaceful place Mought be some dressed up dudes in dat fair town  5.   She got a dear ole modder She is in hebben I know He sees Mammy L‘il mammy—wrinkled face Her brown eyes, quick to tears—to joy With such happy pride in her Guitar plunkin’ boy. Oh kain't I be one in nummer? Mammy With deep religion defeating the grief Life piled so closely about her Ise so glad trouble doan last ‘alway’ And her dogged belief That some fine day She'd go a machin When de saints go ma'chin home. He sees her ma’chin home, ma’chin along, Her perky joy shining in her furrowed face, Her weak and quavering voice singing her song— The best chair set apart for her worn out body In that restful place . . . I pray to de Lawd I'll meet her When de saints go ma’chin home.  6.   He'd shuffle off from us, always, at that, His face a brown study beneath his torn brimmed hat His broad shoulders slouching, his old box strung Around his neck;—he’d go where we Never could follow him—to Sophie probably, Or to his dances--in old Tinbridge flat.   Published in Opportunity, July 1927 Awarded First Prize in Opportunity Poetry Competition, 1927
__label__notpolitical To dance— In the light of moon, A platinum moon Poised like a slender dagger On the velvet darkness of night.  To dream— ’Neath the bamboo trees On the sable breast Of earth— And listen to the wind.  To croon— Weird sweet melodies Round the cabin door With banjos clinking softly— And from out the shadow Hear the beat of tom-toms Resonant through the years.  To plunge— My brown body In a golden pool, And lazily float on the swell Watching the rising sun.  To stand— On a purple mountain Hidden from earth By mists of dreams And tears—  To talk— With God.  
__label__notpolitical Bodies are lamps And their life is the light. Ivory, Gold, Bronze and Ebony— Yet all are lamps And their lives the lights.  Dwelling in the tabernacles     Of the most high—are lamps. Lighting the weary pilgrims’ way     As they travel the dreary night—are lamps. Swinging aloft in great Cathedrals     Beaming on rich and poor alike—are lamps. Flickering fitfully in harlot dives     Wanton as they that dwell therein— are lamps. Ivory, Gold, Bronze and Ebony— Yet all are lamps And their lives the lights.  Some flames rise high above the horizon     And urge others to greater power. Some burn steadfast thru the night     To welcome the prodigal home. Others flicker weakly, lacking oil to burn     And slowly die unnoticed. What matter how bright the flame     How weak? What matter how high it blazes     How low? A puff of wind will put it out.  You and I are lamps—Ebony lamps, Our flame glows red and rages high within But our ebon shroud becomes a shadow And our light seems weak and low.     Break that shadow     And let the flame illumine heaven     Or blow wind…blow     And let our feeble lights go out. 
__label__notpolitical Out of the hush of night, Out of the sob of morn, Out of the sigh of noon, Thy soul was born.  Part of the gentle tears That dim fair April’s eyes, Part of the gladsome smiles That warm her skies;  Grace of the violet shy, Fragrance of new-born rose, Beauty of every flower That woodland grows;  Softness of mild May winds, Sweetness of days in June; Lilt from a melody Of heavenly tune;  Out of the ages past, Out of the years to be; Out of his vast unknown God fashioned thee.  
__label__notpolitical That Hill This poem won honorable mention in THE CRISIS contest of 1926.  IT crawled away from ’neath my feet, And left me standing there; A little at a time, went up An atmospheric stair.  I couldn’t go for watching it, To see where it would stop; A tree sprang out and waved to me When it had reached the top.  The tree kept nodding friendly like, Beckoning me to follow; And I went crawling up and up, Like it did from the hollow.  Then I saw why the thing would go A-soaring from the dell— T’was nearing Heaven every bound, And fleeing fast from Hell! 
__label__notpolitical She kneeled before me begging      That I should with a prayer Give her absolution      (How golden was her hair!) She begged an absolution      While the moments fled, She thought my tears were pity       (My Soul, her lips were red!) She begged of me forgiveness,      God you understand (For pale and soft and slender      Was her dainty hand!) She begged that I should pray You      That her Soul might rest But I could not pray, O Master      (Ivory was her breast!)
__label__notpolitical There Is no sweetness In the kiss Of a mouth Unwarm and dead And even passion's Flaming bliss Turns ashen In a charnel bed. Salome Of the wine red lips, What would you with Death's head?
__label__notpolitical Gay little devils That hide in gin And tickle black boys Under the chin And make them laugh, Gay little devils That lurk in kisses, And shine in the eyes Of ebony misses, Shine in their eyes: Whee-e-el! O-o-o-o . . . Boom! Jazz band in a cabaret! The quick red hour Before the day.
__label__notpolitical Jazz? Remember that song About the winds in the trees Singing me pretty melodies? Was nice, wasn’t it? Hear that violin? Say, Buddy, you know It’s spring in the country Where flowers grow. Play, jazz band! I’m tired. — O, gee! Sure, go ahead, Buy a drink for me. 
__label__notpolitical I’d rather have the thought of you to       hold against my heart, Than any gift that mortal hands have       power to impart. I'd rather have the dream of you to keep       within my breast, Than any shining dower of gold by for-       tune’s few possessed. Ah, love, no sweeter thing than this I’d       ask to come to me, That I might keep the thought of you       through all eternity. 
__label__notpolitical God knew I'd struggled lone and long, He heard me crying in the night; He knew I was not strong Enough to carry out the fight, So he drew me from the noisy throng; And breathed into my sould a song." 
__label__notpolitical The Bird in the Cage  This poem received Honorable Mention in The Crisis Prize contest of 1926.  I AM not better than my brother over the way, But he has a bird in the cage and I have not, It beats its little fretted green wings Against the wires of its prison all day long. Backward and forward it leaps, While summer air is tender and the shadows of leaves Rock on the ground, And the earth is cool and heated in spots, And the air from rich herbage rises teeming, And gold of suns spills all around, And birds within the maples And birds upon the oaks fly and sing and flutter. And there is that little green prisoner, Tossing its body forward and up, Backward and forth mechanically! I listen for its hungry little song, Which comes unsatisfying, Like drops of dew dispelled by drought O, rose bud doomed to ripen in a bud vase! O, bird of song within that binding cage! Nay, I am not better than my brother over the way, Only he has a bird in a cage and I have not. 
__label__notpolitical Your eyes are bold Like all the stars That blaze in jungle skies. Your lips are sweet Like jungle fruit That no one sells or buys.  Your breast is warm Like tropic noons, Like noons of jungle days. Your voice sounds strange Like all the winds That sing wild jungle lays.  In your embrace There’s strength and joy And God has given thee A flame to fire Thy soul and burn Within incessantly. 
__label__notpolitical Brown girls that my arms have known, Old loves and better days Come back again to trouble me, Whenever a jazzband plays. Brown girls I had quite forgot With love's first pointed flames Are here again, when the music starts— I even remember names.
__label__notpolitical My friend, you marvel how this thing can be, A blackened bard is told to sing; and | Am moved to supplement you: I muse why And when Apollo’s rare proclicity; How he can muster ample nerve to try This way of beauty, knowing full well, Ay! How, begging, Homer died. I dimly see, Since it is proved that dye of any hue Does not impair the essence of a thing. How two of equal gifts and chance may do An equal deed. Still I am marvelling— How one black poet ploughs the whole day long And burns the oil of midnight for a song.  
__label__notpolitical He had taken a reed and made him stops And set it to his mouth, And was strolling along our careless street That follows the river south— A black boy and a reedy flute, A black child skipped behind— A white man, following, laughed and said, “This is a lucky find! That boy can swing a better pick Than any man at the Dam, But who'd a thought o° music and him! Lawd! any black boy can lam A tune out o° a cast iron pipe, Or a wooden railroad tie— If they couldn’t open up and sing Every last one ‘d die!” But I was plashing on the brink Of a sleepy river wide, Playing hide and seek in reeds That covered the shallow side; I was swinging from a vine That gripped a mighty tree, Higher and higher, pulsing, glad, A rhythm of eternity; I was dancing in a glade, The moon and | were mad, Till cool, dewed grass held quivering limbs And breath was the pain I had; I was lost in a night-black wood, And heard a clear birdsong: Dropping in weariness, I dreamt That walking I found the dawn— The reedy flute was under the hill, Each went back to his task. A black god caught us unaware, We dropped each needful mask Hiding the child-face that must light When a flute player passes by— “If they coula's open up and sing Every last one ’d die!”
__label__notpolitical Sing on, O Son of Africa's soil. Let her music touch the world, Make it feel her warm sunshine 'Til it melts their voices into thine.  Your songs burn with a fervent heat, I even hear the tom-tom beat, I see the palm trees swaying there And smell the balmy tropic air.  God has giv'n this song to you So let it ring the whole world through 'Til every soul shall hear and see Africa's glory expressed in thee.
__label__notpolitical The Black Minstrel Sings :— You Ain’t been there, brother? Don’t tell me so! “...Tell ’im ‘bout it...tell ‘im bout it…” Han’ me ma sax An’ lemme go ‘Taint nothin’ to ‘im Lemme tell ’im so— Han’ me ma sax An’ lemme go... Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Boody...see hootchiepep Hootchiepep...See boody— ...I'll sing ’im ’bout it—  Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Niggers, Jigs an’ shiney spades Highbrowns, yallers, fagingy-fagades “ …Oh say it, brother Say it...” Pullman porters, shipping clerks an’ monkey chasers Actors, lawyers, Black Jews an’ fairies Ofays, pimps, low-downs an’ dicties Cabarets, gin an’ number tickets All mixed in With gangs o’churches— Sugar-foot misters an’ sun-dodgin’ sisters Don’t get up Till other folks long in bed... …Hey!...Hey! “Say it, brother Say it...” My gal’s A Sealskin brown Hot lips And sweet, O God! Uh... huh, But ma gal’s A white gal Das’ all…  Harlem...Harlem Black, black Harlem Souls of Black Folk Ask Du Bois Little grey restless feet Ask Claude McKay City of Refuge Ask Rudolph Fisher Don’t damn your body’s itch Ask Countee Cullen Does the jazz band sob? Ask Langston Hughes Nigger Heaven Ask Carl Van Vechten Hey!...Hey! Sing ’im "bout it “ ...Say it, brother Say it…” 
__label__notpolitical I look and that I see appeals to me As does the manger Babe to Christian man, For she who mothered long another’s brood Upon her lap in rapture holds a child That came from deep travail to claim her love.  Upon its lips she prints a deathless kiss And holds against her breast its trembling form  And through the night she croons a strange old song That tells the world, “Behold, I have my own.”  For she is mother now, that once was such A cruel world with jibes derided her And asked her, “Where are those you brought to light? Where all those hopes you said were yours to give?”  I hear this turbaned mother plead, “O world,  My hopes have shaped themselves in flesh o’ brown And all my deeds have given light to eyes That grasp its infant hour of wonderment. Take now my suckling, let it live for thee And when its manhood breaks its spirit’s bound It shall defend thee, succour thee and love The good that through the ages thou hast served.”  And when the child in sleep would close its eyes This strong young mother lifts with tenderness This proselyte to all the joys and woes An ancient world would give to test its own And lays it snug within its trundle bed And lets the moonlight play upon its form. 
__label__notpolitical Black Sampson is a singing man;      He’s blind and big and strong. A steel guitar is in his hands,      And in his mouth, a song.  He shuffles up and down the streets,      Led by a little child; His voice is vibrant, deep and loud,      Like the sea when the winds are wild.  There’s sunshine, laughter, pain, and tears,      In the songs black Sampson sings— The slave’s sad wail, the warrior’s shout,      And the laughter of rippling springs.  There’s something in his voice that clings,      Like Ethiopia’s arms, Which holds the strength of Pyramids,      And great Sahara’s charms. When Sampson sings he holds the throng      With the spell of his magic bars, Which thrill like the sound of tom-tom drums,      On the Congo, under the stars. 
__label__notpolitical Out in the night, I hear a liquid note,      I pause and listen, as it sweeter grows; It is a singer with a golden throat,       And heart in which the fire of genius glows. I hear him singing in the twilight hush–      Caroling songs that warm the heart like sweet wine:  No sweet-voiced nightingale or hermit-thrush      Could thrill the world with music more divine.  Though young in year, he sings as one whose heart       Has sung for ages. Yet he wears his crown,  So modestly that men, thrilled by his art,       Pay tribute and forget that his face is brown.  Unselfishly, his soul seeks to inspire       In other souls, divine poetic fire. 
__label__notpolitical Mellow notes, Fluted  Vibrant with the echoes of an old forgotten song; Sweet and low, Swinging so, Breaking forth like summer winds that gaily sweep along.  Harmony, Melody Blending like the colours of the rosy-fingered dawn, Measured time, Tones sublime Gentle as an April shower pattering on a lawn.  Bass alone, A swelling moan, “All you little chillen bettah git on bo’d!” “Bye and bye, B’yon’ de sky, Ise sholy gwine a lay down mah heavy, heavy load.”  Smiles and tears, Hopes and fears, “Lawd ha’ mercy on me an’ I hope I'll jine de ban’.” “Glory hallelu! Gwine a put on mah shoe, And walk all ober heb’n jus’ a singin’ thro’ de lan.”  Mellow notes, Fluted throats, Whispering the chorus of an old forgotten song, Sweet and low, Swinging so, Sighing like the evening breeze that gently sweeps along. 
__label__notpolitical I see shining black hair smoothed back on round dark foreheads. And agile bodies sway, from side to side, like trees cradled by a rhythmic wind. Tom-toms thud ... thud ... thud. I hear the soft gurgle of rippling waters; the jubilation of the jungle moon, laughing with the stars; and the howl of the jackal in the tangled bush. I hear the soft, pure music of angels, and the loud quick cacophony of demons, blended in concert all together.
